


                                 Chapter 45


                                CONFIRMATION


1. What It Is.


CONFIRMATION is a sacrament which gives us LIGHT and STRENGTH to be  perfect
SOLDIERS OF CHRIST.


Sublime as are the effects of baptism, it is still a BIRTH.  And  at  birth,
we are all INFANTS, in the supernatural as well as in the natural order.  If
the inhabitants of a country were all infants, how helpless they  would  be!
How powerless to defend themselves against enemies! It  would  be  the  same
for the Church. It could never survive. In every age, it  is  surrounded  by
bitter enemies who do their  utmost  to  destroy  it.  These  are  not  only
cunning human beings, full of hatred, but also fallen  angels  who  are  far
more cunning and powerful than men. Of course, Our Lord  has  promised  that
even the gates of hell shall never  prevail  against  His  Church.  But,  to
fulfil this promise, He has to provide in every age vast  numbers  of  loyal
Catholics who will FIGHT as His soldiers against the enemies of the  Church.
He does this by means of the sacrament of CONFIRMATION.


2. How Christ Established It.


In confirmation we receive the HOLY GHOST, in somewhat the same way  as  the
Apostles received Him at Pentecost.


Now, Our Lord could not thus  send  the  Holy  Ghost,  until  He  had  first
ascended to heaven. He made this clear to His Apostles when He said: “It  is
expedient to you that I go (i.e. ascend to heaven); for, if  I  go,  I  WILL
SEND HIM TO YOU.” (John 16:7).


From this you can see that Our Lord could not establish  this  sacrament  by
ADMINISTERING it Himself, in the  way  He  established  the  Eucharist,  for
example. But He could and did establish it while He was still  on  earth  by
PROMISING it. This He did in the words just  quoted,  when  He  promised  to
send us the Holy Ghost. Confirmation gives us the special help of  the  Holy
Ghost by giving us or increasing in  us  His  seven  great  Gifts  of  Fear,
Piety, Fortitude, Counsel, Knowledge, Understanding and Wisdom.


This is why many texts of the  New  Testament  tell  us  that  the  Apostles
administered this sacrament by imposing hands on the  baptised,  and  giving
them the Holy Ghost.


Tradition  is  equally  clear  in  its  teaching  that  confirmation  is   a
sacrament. Pages of quotations from the early Fathers could  be  given;  but
we have space for only one. It is from Pope  Melchiades,  who  died  in  the
year 314. He says:


“By baptism,  we  are  purified.  By  confirmation,  we  are  fortified.  By
baptism, we are saved from death. After baptism, we are confirmed  in  life.
Baptism makes us enter into the  peace  of  Christ.  Confirmation  arms  and
equips us for the fight. The baptised is inscribed in  the  civil  condition
of the Christian society, from which one must  take  the  recruits  for  the
army of Christ. The confirmed enters into  the  service  of  this  army.  In
brief, baptism refers  us  to  Christ  as  subjects;  confirmation,  as  His
soldiers.” What could be clearer? What more authoritative? In  denying  that
confirmation is a sacrament, the Protestants simply  ignored  Scripture  and
Tradition. No wonder their error was condemned infallibly by the Council  of
Trent.


The SIGN ONLY of confirmation is the external ceremony. The THING  AND  SIGN
is the character given.  The  THING  ONLY  is  the  grace  bestowed  on  the
recipient.


3. The Matter and the Form.


     (a). MATTER.


The REMOTE matter is CHRISM. This is OLIVE OIL mixed with BALM,  blessed  by
a bishop. This blessing is required because Christ did not Himself  sanctify
chrism by His touch, as He did bread and wine for  the  Eucharist.  The  oil
signifies LIGHT, since it was used in lamps; and  also  STRENGTH,  since  it
was used by athletes competing in the games. The balm symbolises  the  sweet
odour of sanctity that should accompany a  worthy  soldier  of  Christ.  The
chrism is placed on the forehead, which is  a  living  mirror  of  fear  and
shame, in order to show that we must never blush in shame at our  faith,  or
manifest the least fear on account of its enemies.


The PROXIMATE matter is the IMPOSITION OF HANDS by the one  confirming,  and
the ANOINTING with chrism, in the form of a Cross.


The Cross is the banner of Christ, the King  of  Kings,  whose  soldiers  we
become by confirmation. It is a sign of  ultimate  victory;  for  Christ  is
omnipotent, and all His enemies will be defeated in the end. He,  not  they,
will reign in eternity. The one being confirmed also receives a tap  on  the
cheek. This represents the accolade given of old to knights. It reminds  him
that he is a knight of Christ, and that his allegiance should  be  life-long
and complete.








     (b). FORM.


This is found in the words: “I sign thee with the sign of the Cross,  and  I
confirm thee with the chrism of salvation, in the name of  the  Father,  and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”


4. The Persons Concerned.


     (a). The Subject.


In some countries such as Spain and South  America,  confirmation  is  given
straight after baptism. But we usually wait till a  child  is  eleven.1  For
validity, the person being confirmed must be baptised,  not  yet  confirmed,
and have the intention of receiving the sacrament, if he is  an  adult.  For
licity, he must be in a state of grace; and, if an adult,  he  must  have  a
sufficient knowledge of the faith. Adults who are dying  and  have  not  yet
been confirmed should receive this sacrament in order that they may  have  a
more glorious resurrection as soldiers of Christ.


     (b). The Minister.


The ORDINARY minister is a Bishop. The EXTRAORDINARY, a priest. It  is  well
to bear in mind the fact that a parish priest  can  administer  confirmation
in case of necessity – to a dying  adult,  for  instance,  when  the  Bishop
cannot be had.


     (c). The Sponsor.


Each candidate for confirmation should have a  sponsor  when  possible.  The
sponsor should be a good  Catholic,  and  one  already  confirmed.  May  the
sponsor be father, mother, or spouse of the person being confirmed? No.  Who
chooses the sponsor? The parents or guardians or  the  priest.  The  sponsor
must personally or by proxy touch the candidate during  the  ceremony.  This
is done by placing the right hand on the right shoulder of the  subject.  So
much for validity  in  a  sponsor.  Now,  for  licity.  A  sponsor  must  be
different from the one who acted as sponsor in baptism;[1] of the  same  sex
as the subject; and at least fourteen years of age.


SPIRITUAL RELATIONSHIP arises from confirmation between the subject and  the
sponsor; and it obliges the latter to do what he or she can to  educate  the
subject in a Catholic way, if the parents fail in their obligation.


5. The Effects of Confirmation.


     (a). The Immediate Effect.


The immediate effect of confirmation is the  CHARACTER  it  gives.  Here  is
what it does for us: –

1. It likens us to Christ fighting in His public life against  the  enemies
   of His divine mission.
2. It gives us the power of confessing publicly and officially the faith of
   Christ, and of fighting for it as His soldiers.
3. It makes us adults in the supernatural order, as distinct  from  infants
   just born by baptism.
4. It gives all through life a  right  to  graces  of  light  and  strength
   necessary for professing and defending our faith.
5. If we are called up to die as martyrs, it will enable us to act as God's
   instrumental causes, He being the Principal Cause of  our  steadfastness
   at death. Hence, martyrdom need have no fear for us.
6. Through it Christ fulfils His promise to be with His Church all days  to
   the end of the world; for it enables her subjects to profess, live,  and
   even die for the faith.

     (b). The Ultimate Effect.


This is the GRACE that confirmation gives. It is one of LIGHT and  STRENGTH,
such as the Apostles received at Pentecost.


The chrism shining on the forehead of a child will soon disappear;  but  the
character given will remain forever; and, all during life, it  will  give  a
right to the graces necessary in a worthy soldier of Christ.


6. Confirmation and Catholic Action.


Catholics readily realise  the  need  of  baptism,  penance,  matrimony  and
extreme unction. They realise, too, the beauty of the Eucharist and of  Holy
Orders. But few realise as they ought the need of confirmation.


Why? Because the purpose  of  confirmation  is  to  make  us  APOSTLES;  and
comparatively few Catholics realise their  obligation  to  act  as  Christ's
apostles. Supernaturally, they are not like SOLDIERS at all. They  are  like
mere CHILDREN.


Children live almost solely for  THEMSELVES.  They  rarely  busy  themselves
with anything that lies beyond their  individual  needs.  They  spend  their
time, not in giving, but in receiving. Now, too many adult Catholics act  in
this self-centred way. They  apply  themselves  to  their  OWN  supernatural
welfare – and, of course, in doing  this  they  act  rightly.  But  they  do
little to SPREAD the faith to others. They are  not  sufficiently  SOCIALLY-
MINDED in the supernatural  order.  They  do  not  seem  to  have  grown  up
SUPERNATURALLY.


What distinguishes a grown-up person from a child?  Surely  it  is,  as  St.
Thomas  points  out,  a  certain  BREADTH  OF  OUTLOOK,  a  true  SENSE   OF
RESPONSIBILITY, and ACTION FOR THE COMMON GOOD.


Now a SOLDIER – especially a soldier of Christ – must  be  such  a  man.  He
must think, not just of his OWN good, but also of the good  of  others,  the
good of the community, the good of his country.  He  must  have  breadth  of
outlook. Again, he must realise his obligation to protect his  country,  and
even to die for it if necessary, in virtue of  his  office  as  soldier.  He
must have a sense of responsibility. Finally, he must not be content  merely
to think these things. He must put them into practice. He must live and  act
for the common good.


Confirmation lifts us suddenly out of the INFANT stage of  the  supernatural
life, and makes us ADULTS, fighting, virile adults, soldiers of  the  faith.
Pope Pius XII says: “By the chrism of confirmation, the faithful  are  given
added strength to PROTECT and DEFEND  the  Church,  their  mother,  and  the
faith She has given them.” What would you think of a healthy man  who  would
not lift a finger to protect his mother against enemies? What  a  coward  he
would be! How lacking in virility! Yet how  many  otherwise  good  Catholics
are like that when it comes to  fighting  for  the  Church,  though  She  is
indeed their mother, since She generates them  anew  into  the  supernatural
order by baptism, and makes them adopted sons of God and heirs to heaven!


Over and over again recent Popes have begged the faithful to  realise  their
obligation to live and act as soldiers and apostles  of  Christ.  Leo  XIII,
Pius X, Pius XI and Pius XII have all insisted on this. They  have  reminded
the faithful that the Church is a MILITANT body, ready to fight unto  death.
This battling for the protection  and  the  spreading  of  the  faith  is  a
glorious part of CATHOLIC  ACTION,  which  Pope  Pius  XI  describes  as  “A
PARTICIPATION OF THE LAITY IN THE APOSTOLATE OF THE CHURCH'S HIERARCHY.”


What a privilege it is for the laity thus to be able to co-operate with  the
successors of the Apostles in the noblest of all works: the sanctifying  and
saving of souls! How devoted they should be, to such  a  worthy  cause!  And
how loyal and obedient to their bishops, since these, as  a  body  with  the
Pope as their head, are infallible in faith and morals!  If  communists  can
display, as they do, amazing enthusiasm  for  their  degrading  materialism,
which can lead  only  to  man's  misery  and  enslavement  in  time  and  in
eternity, surely Catholics can show an even greater zeal for the  spread  of
their God-given religion, since it alone can enable man to develop  all  his
powers to the full, and become a worthy citizen not only of this  world  but
also of the next!


“What can I do?” a Catholic may say, “I'm only one in  millions.”  Well,  it
is astounding what even one human being  can  do,  if  he  has  courage  and
perseverance and an unlimited love of souls. Think of the incalculable  good
that Maritain has done by his writings! Think of the good  done  by  Salazar
in Portugal! Or that done by that marvellous woman, Catherine de  Hueck,  in
America! If one man, such as Karl Marx, can set  the  whole  world  on  fire
with his ardour for change, surely a good Catholic can do  far  more,  since
he has a true idea of man's real nature and end. Moreover, he has  the  help
of God. He has, through confirmation, an increase in the Gifts of  the  Holy
Ghost. At Pentecost, these Gifts changed  the  Apostles  from  cowards  into
heroes. They gave them light and strength to tackle  their  tremendous  task
of converting the  world.  And  history  shows  the  extent  to  which  they
succeeded in this task. What the Gifts did at the beginning  of  the  Church
they can still do today, provided we cultivate them  and  render  them  more
and more active by increasing our love for God and for our  fellowmen.  With
them, we cannot fail.


Let us therefore try daily to understand our divine faith  better,  so  that
we may be able to explain it to others. Let us love it with all  our  heart,
and live it in all its glorious fullness. Let us train  ourselves  to  argue
with others with a true sympathy for  their  shortcomings,  a  real  insight
into their difficulties, and a love of truth which is irresistible.  Let  us
follow the ruling of the Church in all things, as this is made known  to  us
by the Pope and the bishops. let us put ourselves with all  confidence  into
God's hands, that He may use us as His pliable  instruments.  Let  us  above
all increase our supernatural charity daily, and with it the functioning  of
the Gifts; for the spirit in which we fight for Christ is not one  based  on
hatred, as is that of atheistic communism, but one based on love.


If we do these things, we need have no fear concerning the  success  of  our
mission. The little Cross by which  the  Bishop  enrolled  us  publicly  and
officially as soldiers  of  Christ  at  confirmation  may  have  long  since
disappeared from our forehead; but the indelible character it  imprinted  on
our soul is with us still. And it gives us daily a title to  all  the  light
and strength we need to be a first-class soldier  of  Christ,  even  to  the
point of dying for Him in the way He died for us. Living  and  fighting  for
Him, we shall serve Him well and loyally  to  the  very  end;  we  shall  do
incalculable good to our fellowmen; and we shall  be  truly  happy  in  this
life  with  a  happiness  which  is  but  a  prelude  to  the   everlasting,
unimaginable happiness that will be waiting for us in the next.








                                   SUMMARY

1. What Confirmation Is.
(a). A sacrament that gives  us  light  and  strength  to  live  as  perfect
    soldiers of Christ.
(b). It makes us adults in the supernatural order. Cf. Baptism.
2. How Christ Established It.
(a). Not by administering it, but by promising it.
(b). His promise to send the Holy Ghost after His ascension.
(c). Its elements as a sacrament: i. Sign only: the external  ceremony;  ii.
    Thing and Sign: the character; iii. Thing Only: the grace given.
3. Matter and Form.
(a). Remote Matter:    Chrism, i.e. olive oil and balm.
     Blessed by the Bishop.
(b). Proximate Matter:     Imposition of hands.
     The anointing.
(c). Form:    “I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and I confirm thee
         with the chrism of salvation, in the name of the Father, and of the
         Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
4. Persons Concerned.
(a). Minister:    Ordinary.
         Extraordinary.
(b). Subject:     Baptised.
         Not already confirmed.
(c).  Sponsors:     i.  Need;   ii.   Number;   iii.   Qualifications;   iv.
Obligations.
5. Effects.
(a). Immediate:   The Character.
     What it does for us.
(b). Ultimate:    Graces of light and strength.
         Gifts of the Holy Ghost.
6. Confirmation and Catholic Action.
(a). This sacrament makes us Apostles, soldiers of Christ.
(b). With breadth of outlook, a sense of responsibility, and  a  willingness
   to act for the common good.
(c). Scope given in Catholic Action.
              What it is.
              Exhortations of the Popes.
              Need for it today.
              Requirements.
              Greatness of the work.

                                  EXERCISES

(A). Fill in the blanks and cross out wrong alternatives in  the  following:
–
1. Confirmation gives us light and (...) to be worthy (...)  of  Christ,  2.
He instituted it by (administering) (promising) it. 3. In it we receive  the
(...) as the Apostles did at Pentecost. 4. Scripture  often  speaks  of  the
Apostles imposing hands on persons already baptised,  and  giving  them  the
(...). 5. By baptism  we  are  (...)  in  the  supernatural  order;  but  by
confirmation we are true (...). 6. The Sign  Only  of  confirmation  is  the
(...); the Thing and the Sign is the (...); the Thing Only is the (...).  7.
The remote matter is (...), which is made up of  (...)  and  (...),  and  is
blessed by (...). 8. The proximate matter is (...). 9. The  form  is  (...).
10. The subject of confirmation  is  (...).  11.  The  immediate  effect  of
confirmation is (...). 12. The ultimate effect is (...). 13.  The  character
given makes us like to Christ in His (private) (public) life. 14.  It  gives
us (at the moment of reception only) (all through life) a  right  to  graces
necessary to profess, live and defend our (...). 15. It gives  or  increases
in us the seven Gifts of  the  (...).  16.  In  martyrdom,  it  enables  the
recipient to act as (principal) (instrumental) cause  of  the  steadfastness
required. 17. It is through the character given by (baptism)  (confirmation)
(Holy Orders) that Christ provides for His Church in every  century  members
who are  willing  to  fight  and  die  for  the  faith.  18.  The  character
(disappears) (does not disappear) as soon as the chrism disappears from  our
forehead. 19. An adult and especially a soldier should be  characterised  by
breadth of (...), a sense of (...),  and  action  for  the  (...).  20.  The
following Popes have strongly advocated Catholic  Action  in  recent  times:
(...), (...), (...) and (...). 21. Pius XI describes Catholic Action  as  “A
participation of the  (...)  in  the  (...)  of  the  Church's  (...).”  22.
Catholic Action is based on (love) (hatred); atheistic  communism  is  based
on (love) (hatred). 23. In practising Catholic Action I must obey  the  Pope
and the (...). 24. Here  are  five  things  I  must  do  if  I  want  to  be
successful as a Catholic Actionist: I must (...), (...),  (...),  (...)  and
(...). 25. If I live and fight for Christ on earth, I shall reign  with  Him
in (...).
(B). Answer these questions as fully as you can: –
1.   What is confirmation? How does it differ from baptism?
2.   How did Christ institute it?
3.   What is its: (i). Remote matter; (ii). Proximate Matter; (iii). Form?
4.   Who is its minister? Its subject? The Sponsor?
5.   Explain all that the character given by it does for us.
6.   What graces does this sacrament give?
7.   What is Catholic Action? What has confirmation to do with it?
8.   What must I do to make myself a great Catholic Actionist?
-----------------------
1 [Editor’s note] “The sacarment of confirmation is to be conferred  on  the
faithful at about the age of discretion unless  the  conference  of  bishops
determines another age or there is danger of death or in  the  judgement  of
the minister a grave cause urges otherwise.” Can. 891.
[1] [Editor’s Note]. Can.  893  §2.  “It  is  desirable  that  the  one  who
undertook the role of sponsor at baptism be sponsor for confirmation.”

