


                                 Chapter 46


                                THE EUCHARIST


1. Christ's Promise.


Just as  Our  Lord  made  it  easier  for  the  people  to  believe  in  His
resurrection by raising the dead to life, so, too, He  made  it  easier  for
them to believe in the  Eucharist  by  changing  water  into  wine,  and  by
multiplying the loaves and fishes.  One  with  such  complete  control  over
nature could surely change bread into His own body and wine into His  blood,
and so give us Himself in the sacrament of His love.


After multiplying the loaves  and  fishes,  He  reminded  the  Jews  of  the
marvellous bread, the MANNA, that God had once given them. He then  promised
them a bread that would be far more marvellous,  because  it  would  benefit
not just their natural health as the manna did, but  the  supernatural  life
of their souls. Why? Because it would be HIMSELF.


“I AM THE BREAD OF LIFE,” He said. Then  He  added  these  momentous  words:
“THE BREAD THAT I WILL GIVE IS MY FLESH, FOR THE LIFE OF THE  WORLD.”  (John
6: 48; 52).


Notice that He is here PROMISING something. What? A  BREAD.  Of  what  kind?
One that IS His FLESH, His, BODY, HIMSELF. And why?  To  nourish  the  life,
the SUPERNATURAL life, of the world.


Did His hearers understand Him to be making such a  promise?  Yes.  This  is
clear from the fact that they were SCANDALISED at His words.  HOW  CAN  THIS
MAN GIVE US HIS FLESH TO EAT?” they murmured. (John 6:53).


Now, it is important to see how Christ  reacted  to  their  murmuring.  Why?
Here is the reason.


Whenever His hearers gave a WRONG meaning to His words, He always  CORRECTED
it immediately by explaining clearly what He meant. For  instance,  He  told
Nicodemus how one could be born again supernaturally by baptism. (John  3:3-
6). He explained to His hearers that the “sleep” of Lazarus  meant  “death.”
(John  11:14).  And  that  the  “leaven”  of  the  Pharisees   meant   their
“hypocrisy.”


When, on the other hand,  His  hearers  understood  Him  RIGHTLY,  but  were
UNWILLING to believe what He said, He always  REPEATED  His  statement,  and
STRESSED it. For instance, when He claimed that He could forgive  sins,  and
the Jews murmured at His claim, He INSISTED on it all  the  more,  and  even
worked a miracle to prove it. (Mat. 9:2-7). Again, when the Jews sneered  at
Him for claiming to be greater than Abraham,  He  backed  up  His  claim  by
insisting on His eternal existence as God. “Before  Abraham  was  made,”  He
said, “I AM.” (John 8:56-58).


In which of these two ways, now, did Christ act when His hearers  understood
Him to be promising Himself as the supernatural food of our  souls?  Did  He
regard this as a wrong interpretation, and correct it  by  saying  something
like this: “No, I am not promising Myself to be your  food  in  the  literal
sense of the term. I am speaking figuratively. I am merely asking for  FAITH
in My mission as Redeemer.” Had He meant  to  be  thus  understood,  He  was
OBLIGED by the laws of truth to make this clear to His hearers. But  He  did
nothing like this. On the contrary, He APPROVED of the  interpretation  they
had put on His words, and He INSISTED that they ACCEPT HIS  PROMISE  in  its
literal or  proper  sense.  He  REPEATED  His  words  six  times,  and  even
confirmed them with what was equivalent to an OATH.


“AMEN, AMEN, I SAY UNTO YOU,” He said “EXCEPT YOU EAT THE FLESH OF  THE  SON
OF MAN AND DRINK HIS BLOOD, YOU SHALL NOT HAVE LIFE IN YOU.


“HE THAT EATETH MY FLESH AND DRINKETH MY BLOOD HATH EVERLASTING LIFE; AND  I
WILL RAISE HIM UP ON THE LAST DAY.


“FOR MY FLESH IS MEAT INDEED (i.e. in literal truth) AND MY BLOOD  IS  DRINK
INDEED (i.e. in literal truth).


“HE THAT EATETH MY FLESH AND DRINKETH MY BLOOD ABIDETH IN ME, AND I IN  HIM.



“AS THE LIVING FATHER HATH SENT ME, AND I LIVE BY THE  FATHER,  SO  HE  THAT
EATETH ME THE SAME ALSO SHALL LIVE BY ME.


“THIS IS THE BREAD THAT CAME DOWN FROM HEAVEN. NOT AS YOUR FATHERS  DID  EAT
MANNA AND ARE DEAD. HE THAT EATETH THIS BREAD  SHALL  LIVE  FOREVER.”  (John
6:54-59).


How insistent He is that we must EAT His FLESH and DRINK His  BLOOD,  if  we
are to live SUPERNATURALLY by a life which is a sharing in His  and  in  His
Father's. He could not have been more emphatic.


And how did the Jews  take  all  this?  Scripture  says  that  many  of  His
disciples still found His promise too difficult to believe. “THIS IS A  HARD
SAYING,” they said, “AND WHO CAN HEAR IT?” (John 6:61).


Doubtless they imagined that we would have to eat Our Lord's Body and  drink
His Blood in the crude way in which we take ordinary  food  and  drink;  for
Our Lord went on to assure them that He would continue  to  come  to  us  to
nourish our souls even after He had risen in glory to heaven.  (John  6:23).
He as much as told them that He would find a way of coming to us that  would
not be in the least  repulsive,  since  He  would  hide  Himself  under  the
appearances of ordinary bread and wine.


In spite of this, however, many of His disciples “WENT BACK,”  as  Scripture
puts it, “AND WALKED NO MORE WITH HIM.” (John 6:67). And what  could  He  do
but let them go? They had understood His  promise  rightly,  but  they  were
unwilling to accept it. They lacked the faith that He had  appealed  for  so
ardently before He made it.


Finally, turning to His Apostles, He said: “WILL YOU ALSO  GO  AWAY?”  (John
6:68). What a question! How grief stricken it must have been! Think  of  it.
Our Saviour has just promised to give us HIMSELF in the  Eucharist  that  He
may be our companion in our exile on this  earth,  and  may  come  into  our
hearts in Person as our divine Friend in the most intimate  of  unions;  and
He has to ask His Apostles whether they, like the rest, will  leave  Him  on
account of this incomparable proof of His love!


Replying for the other Apostles as well as for himself,  and  for  countless
generations of believers yet unborn, Peter gives the  only  answer  man  can
ever give: “LORD, TO WHOM SHALL WE GO? THOU HAST THE WORDS OF ETERNAL  LIFE.
AND WE HAVE BELIEVED AND HAVE KNOWN THAT THOU ART THE  CHRIST,  THE  SON  OF
GOD.” (John 6:69-70).


As yet, Peter knew nothing about TRANSUBSTANTIATION, but  he  had  faith  in
Christ's omnipotence. He believed His promise because it had behind  it  the
AUTHORITY OF GOD. Millions of sincere souls have accepted it  for  the  same
reason since his day. Millions will so accept it to the end.


What a touching scene all this makes! Think  of  it  again.  It  opens  with
Divinity  begging  in  advance  to  be  accepted  as  nourishment  for   the
supernatural life of His creature. No forcing of the will.  No  browbeating.
Just a quiet insistence which runs into repetitions of the same  idea,  lest
any doubt cling to its meaning. Only that, and a look that must  have  stung
to sadness the  poor  self-cheating  unfortunates  who,  catching  the  full
import of the Saviour's  promise,  decided  that  it  was  too  hard  to  be
fulfilled, though it was the answer to  man's  deepest  need  in  life.  “It
cannot be done,” they as much as said.


When will man learn not to measure God by the finite littleness of  his  own
mind? A youth in love would pull the universe  to  pieces,  drag  the  stars
from the firmament, compel flowers to sing and the earth to  turn  to  gold,
if it pleased his beloved, and – IF HE COULD. But what can  stop  a  God  in
love from working miracles? By what logic does  man's  puny  intellect  dare
think that he cannot?


Stupidity of pride! What tragedies  has  history  recorded  because  of  it!
“After this, many of His disciples went back and walked no more  with  Him.”
So runs the sad story of human folly. No wonder the Saviour had to view  His
beloved Jerusalem from the hillside through a  mist  of  tears.  “Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest  them  that  are  sent
unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together as the  hen
doth gather her chickens under her  wings,  and  thou  wouldst  not?”  (Mat.
23:37). No wonder! When,  standing  in  the  synagogue  at  Capharnaum,  the
sacred beauty of His promise scarcely spoken, He had to watch His  disciples
one after another slinking off in the strange silence.


How consoling to His Sacred Heart must Peter's  reply  have  been!  And  how
often since has this same cry echoed from hearts broken by  sorrow  and  the
darkness of life! “To whom shall we go?” The question  answers  itself,  for
it simply asks who can be preferred to God.


2. How Christ Fulfilled This Promise.


St. Matthew (26:26-28), St. Mark (24:22-24), St.  Luke  (22:19-20)  and  St.
Paul (1 Cor. 10: 14-21) tell how Christ  fulfilled  His  promise.  They  all
relate how, at the last supper, Christ said over the bread that He  held  in
His hands: “THIS IS MY BODY,” and over the wine: “THIS  IS  MY  BLOOD”;  and
how He then commanded His Apostles to do what  He  had  done:  “DO  THIS  IN
COMMEMORATION OF ME.”


Protestants maintain that the  bread  and  the  wine  are  mere  SYMBOLS  of
Christ's Body and Blood. They say that  He  had  no  verb  meaning  “is  the
symbol of;” so He used “is” instead. But Our Lord had over  forty  verbs  He
could have used to say “is a symbol of”; and He was OBLIGED to  use  one  of
them, if that was what He meant. Yet, He used none of them. He  said  simply
and plainly “is.”


Why? Because this verb in a judgment expresses a real IDENTITY  between  the
subject and the predicate. In  a  speculative  judgment  it  MANIFESTS  this
identity, as when we say that man is  a  rational  animal.  In  a  PRACTICAL
judgment, it EFFECTS it. And this is what it does here.


When Christ said to the corpse of Lazarus: “Arise!”  His  word  accomplished
what it signified. The dead rose to life. Similarly, when He says  over  the
bread: “This IS My Body” and over the wine: “This IS  my  Blood”  His  words
effect what they signify. They must.  Otherwise,  He  is  not  uttering  the
truth. What was bread must become the Body of  Christ,  and  what  was  wine
must become His Blood. There is no question here of a mere SYMBOL.  Instead,
there is the dread REALITY, the real BODY and  BLOOD  of  Christ  under  the
appearance of bread and wine.


This is all the more evident when we remember that Our Lord was here  making
His LAST WILL, just before His death.


What would you think of a man who, at  death,  told  his  son  that  he  was
leaving him his property, but meant merely a photograph of it? Could  he  be
said to be sincere? Surely  not.  In  making  a  will,  a  person  uses  the
clearest possible words,  and  in  their  literal  sense.  He  avoids  vague
figures of speech that may be given different meanings.  And  this  is  what
Our Lord did at the Last Supper.


At death, an earthly father longs to say a few last words to  his  children.
Often he cannot find words to express his sentiments. Our Lord  found  words
that were not only most expressive, but also able to  accomplish  what  they
signified, so that in His last will he left us,  not  money,  nor  property,
nor costly jewels such as an ordinary father might leave his  children,  but
HIMSELF.


Moreover, at the Last Supper Our  Lord  put  a  serious  OBLIGATION  on  His
Apostles to do what He had done. He made a LAW  for  them.  And  laws,  like
wills, are framed in the simplest language, the most direct, the least  able
to be misunderstood.


Finally, no sincere person deliberately exposes others to error,  especially
when the error is a very serious one. Now, if Christ did not  mean  what  He
said when He uttered the words: “This is My Body” and “This  is  My  Blood,”
we are forced to hold that He has deceived millions  of  sincere  souls  for
nearly two thousand years and led them into the dreadful  sin  of  idolatry.
But this is impossible. Christ is not a deceiver. He is the Son of God.


The scriptural account of the Last Supper, therefore, shows us most  clearly
that Our Lord  there  fulfilled  the  promise  He  had  previously  made  at
Capharnaum. He promised to give us HIMSELF,  under  the  form  of  FOOD  and
DRINK, to nourish  our  SUPERNATURAL  LIFE.  In  the  cenacle,  He  gave  us
HIMSELF, under the form of BREAD and WINE, as the SUPERNATURAL FOOD  of  our
souls. He fulfilled His promise in every detail. He fulfilled it  perfectly.



3. St. Paul's Testimony.


Writing about the Eucharist to his  converts  at  Corinth,  St.  Paul  says:
“Whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread  and  drink  the  chalice  of  the  Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the BODY and of the BLOOD OF  THE  LORD.  But
let a man prove himself and so let him eat of that bread and drink  of  that
chalice. For he that eateth and  drinketh  unworthily  eateth  and  drinketh
judgment to himself, NOT DISCERNING THE BODY OF THE LORD.”  (1  Cor.  11:27-
29).


Now, if the Eucharist were but a SYMBOL of Christ's  Body,  St.  Paul  might
well blame the Corinthians for not using it with the reverence  due  to  its
symbolism; but he could not blame them, as he does, for  NOT  DISCERNING  in
it the BODY OF THE  LORD.  His  words  make  sense  only  if  the  Eucharist
contains the real Body and Blood of Christ.


In this same Epistle, St. Paul says: “The chalice of  benediction  which  we
bless, is it not the communion of the BLOOD OF CHRIST? And the  bread  which
we break, is it not the partaking of the BODY OF THE LORD?” (1 cor.  10:16).
He is here showing his converts the great difference between the worship  we
give to the Eucharist and that given by  pagans  to  their  idols.  Ours  is
lawful, he says, because the Eucharist  contains  Christ,  and  He  is  God.
Theirs is idolatry, since it is given to mere creatures.  Again,  admit  the
Real Presence, and St. Paul's words make perfect sense.  Deny  it,  and  you
reduce them to nonsense.


St. Paul's testimony is indisputable, because it is  the  inspired  word  of
God. Moreover, it is particularly valuable from a  purely  historical  point
of view, because the first Epistle to the  Corinthians  was  written  within
the years 52-54 A.D.  Hence  it  shows  the  universality  of  the  Church's
teaching concerning the Real Presence even in those very early years.


From what has been said so far, you can see that  it  is  quite  clear  from
SCRIPTURE that the Real Presence is a truth revealed by  God.  Let  us  turn
now to uninspired TRADITION.


4. Tradition.


In this matter we must keep in mind the persecutions which broke out in  the
year 64 and continued for a period of some  two  hundred  and  fifty  years.
During this time the Christians had to go  underground,  as  we  say  today.
They had every reason to put into practice Our Lord's injunction: “Give  not
that which is holy to dogs, neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine.”
(Mat. 7:6). They accordingly hid the sacred things Christ  had  given  them.
They worshipped Him  in  secret.  They  avoided  public  references  to  His
mysteries. This practice was called “The Discipline of the Secret.”  It  was
exercised especially in regard to the  Eucharist,  since  it  was  easy  for
Christ's enemies  to  desecrate  this  sacrament.  Yet  in  spite  of  this,
Tradition is rich in evidence for the universal belief of  the  faithful  in
the Real Presence. To do justice to it would demand not  a  chapter,  but  a
book. At present, we must restrict ourselves to a few samples.





     (a). Early Documents.


Take, for example, the DIDACHE, a precious document written about  the  year
80. It is also called  the  Doctrine  of  the  Apostles,  because  it  gives
regulations made by the Apostles concerning the sacraments, fasts,  prayers,
the election of bishops, and so on. Speaking of the Eucharist, it  bids  the
faithful assemble for Mass on Sundays, and it warns them to make  a  fitting
thanksgiving after Communion, and never to receive Our Lord  when  they  are
in mortal sin. It is thus a very early and  very  authoritative  witness  to
their belief in the Real Presence.


     (b). The Fathers.


These also show the universality of this  same  belief.  For  instance,  St.
Ignatius of Antioch tells us that as early as his day the  word  “Eucharist”
was used  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ  really  present  under  the
appearances of bread and wine after  the  consecration.  And  he  warns  the
faithful that only  a  bishop  or  a  priest  can  validly  consecrate.  His
testimony is of special value, because he was a disciple  of  St.  John  the
Evangelist.


Again, consider St. Justin's evidence. Writing to the Emperor in the  middle
of  the  second  century,  he  refutes  calumnies  that  were  being  spread
concerning the Mass. He explains how the priest there takes bread  and  wine
with which a little water has been mixed,  and  consecrates  them.  Then  he
adds: “The food which Christians call  the  Eucharist  is  not  an  ordinary
bread nor an ordinary drink, but the BODY and BLOOD  OF  CHRIST.”  Perfectly
clear, isn't it? No mere symbol,  but  the  Real  Presence  of  Our  Saviour
Himself in the sacrament of His love.


Many other early Fathers could be cited. St.  Irenaeus,  for  instance,  has
left passages of great beauty concerning the Eucharist. So  have  Tertullian
and St. Cyprian. Later Fathers such  as  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  Cyril  of
Jerusalem, Chrysostom, Hilary, Ambrose  and  Augustine  have  written  whole
treatises about the Real Presence and  the  Mass.  They  leave  no  possible
doubt concerning the teaching of the Church.


     (c). Drawings in the Catacombs.


In the catacombs you  can  still  see  numerous  drawings  that  depict  the
Eucharist under various symbols such as the manna, the  multiplying  of  the
loaves, a banquet, the miracle at Cana, a vine, and so on. There are  others
of bishops and priests saying Mass.


Just as the admirable paintings found in certain caves in Spain  and  France
show the caveman's ability to paint, so, too, the pictures in the  catacombs
testify to the belief of the early Christians in the Real  Presence  and  in
the Mass.





     (d). Inscriptions.


We have space for only one. It is  that  found  on  the  tomb  of  Abercius,
Bishop of Hieropolis, in Phrygia. He lived in the second century.  It  tells
how he once journeyed from his own city in the East to  Rome  in  the  West,
and how all along the way he was able to receive Our Lord in the  Eucharist,
which he calls IKTHOS.


Ikthos is a Greek word, obviously, but it is not  a  synonym  for  Eucharist
which means  thanksgiving.  Why,  then,  did  the  Greeks  use  it  for  the
Eucharist? Because they knew very well that  the  Eucharist  is  Our  Divine
Lord, and they always spoke of Him as CHRIST, SON OF GOD, SAVIOUR. Then,  to
comply with the Discipline of the Secret, they  took  the  first  letter  in
each of these words just as we do today when we speak  of  U.N.R.A.  or  the
S.P.C.A., and they got IKTHOS which happens to be  the  Greek  for  a  fish.
This is why  the  fish  figures  so  prominently  in  the  drawings  in  the
catacombs as a symbol of the Eucharist.


When, consequently, Abercius assures  us  that  in  his  long  journey  from
Hieropolis to Rome he was able EVERYWHERE to receive the  IKTHOS,  he  shows
that all the Christians of his day, both  in  the  East  and  in  the  West,
believed that the Eucharist is no mere symbol of Christ, but His very  SELF,
Body, Blood, Soul and Divinity, Christ the Son of God  and  Saviour  of  the
world.


     (e). Heretics.


Heretics who separated from the Church during the first  thousand  years  of
her history took with them their belief in the  Real  Presence.  There  were
the Nestorians, for example, and the Monophysites who left Her in the  fifth
century, and the Greeks who broke away in the ninth. They would  never  have
retained the doctrine of the Real Presence, had it  not  been  part  of  the
universal teaching of the Church at the time they  left  Her.  So  they  are
valuable witnesses to the universality of this belief.


Like Scripture, then, Tradition tells us that the Real Presence is  a  truth
revealed by God. For over a thousand years ALL  Christians  accepted  it  as
such. When, consequently, the Reformers came  to  deny  it,  the  burden  of
proving their case was on them. Did they offer any proof that Christ is  not
really present in the Eucharist? Not a jot. Instead,  they  gave  a  meaning
unheard of till their day to Christ's words. They made  Him  say  one  thing
and mean another. They distorted  Scripture.  They  ignored  Tradition.  And
their private interpretation soon led to as  many  fantastic  notions  about
the Eucharist as there were reformers to manufacture them.  Can  we  wonder,
then, that the Church condemned their errors at the Council  of  Trent,  and
infallibly defined the dogma of the Real  Presence?  With  the  overwhelming
evidence afforded by Scripture and Tradition, how could She do otherwise?


We cannot hope to understand the Eucharist fully in this life, since  it  is
a supernatural mystery. But we can accept it gratefully and lovingly on  the
AUTHORITY OF GOD who has revealed it. Making our own the  words  of  a  very
ancient liturgy – that of St. Mark – we can exclaim from the depths  of  our
heart: “Credo, credo, credo et confiteor  usque  ad  ultimum  spiritum  quod
Eucharistica sit ipsa caro vivifica Unigeniti dei.” “I  believe,  I  believe
and I confess to my last breath that the Eucharist is the very  life  giving
flesh of the only begotten Son of God.”  How  intense  this  faith  is!  How
whole hearted! How full of joy! You can see the same faith manifested  today
at a Eucharistic Congress when as many as a million people from  almost  all
parts of the world kneel in adoration before Our Divine Lord who,  as  Trent
assures us, is REALLY and TRULY and SUBSTANTIALLY present in  the  sacrament
of His love.


5. How Christ Becomes Present.


At the Last Supper Our Lord took bread and said over it: “This is My  Body.”
Then, wine over which he said: “This is My Blood.”


Now, just as devils fled pell-mell from the possessed at  His  bidding,  and
eyes that had been blind from birth began to see at a mere  word  from  Him,
so, too, the bread instantly became His Body and the  wine  His  Blood.  The
fact that every creature must obey God since it is wholly dependent  on  Him
for its being, made this change inevitable. His  words  effected  what  they
signified. They would have been a lie otherwise. But to  understand  exactly
what they did, we must first consider the difference between what is  called
SUBSTANCE and what is called an ACCIDENT.


If we study created realities from the point of view of HOW THEY  EXIST,  we
find that some have a natural aptitude for  existing  ON  THEIR  OWN  or  IN
THEIR OWN RIGHT (given, of  course,  God's  conserving  influence);  whereas
others have a natural aptitude for existing ONLY IN ANOTHER. The former  are
said to be SUBSTANCES. The latter, ACCIDENTS. Accidents are  also  sometimes
called SPECIES or APPEARANCES, since it is through  them  that  a  substance
appears or makes its presence known to us.


Consider a piece of bread. It  has  certain  colour,  shape,  size,  weight,
temperature  and  taste.  Now,  its  colour  is  obviously  the  colours  OF
something, namely, the bread. Its shape is the shape OF something  –  again,
the bread. It is the same for all its other ACCIDENTS.  An  accident,  then,
is not a being in the full sense of the term. We cannot say of  it  that  it
simply IS. We have to say that it  IS  the  colour,  shape,  size  etc.,  of
something else, IN WHICH it is found in nature. The bread, on the  contrary,
is not bread OF something else. It is simply bread. It exists  ON  ITS  OWN,
not IN ANOTHER. It is a SUBSTANCE.


A SUBSTANCE, then, is THAT WHICH IS, whether it be  the  infinite  substance
we call God, or a created substance that  gets  all  its  being  unceasingly
from Him. An ACCIDENT is THAT BY WHICH a substance is SUCH AND SUCH –  white
or black, heavy or light, large  or  small,  clever  or  dull,  virtuous  or
sinful, and so on  for  the  countless  other  accidents  found  in  created
substances.


Since the substance of a  thing  cannot  be  known  as  such  by  our  sense
faculties, some deny that there is any such  reality.  For  them,  accidents
alone exist. But what happens then? Since these accidents have no  substance
IN which they can exist, they cannot exist IN  anything.  Hence,  each  must
exist ON ITS OWN. In other words, it must be a SUBSTANCE.  So  these  people
begin by saying that there are no substances but only  accidents,  and  they
end by  saying  that  there  are  no  accidents  but  only  substances.  The
substances which they throw out through the window  come  back  through  the
door, more numerous than ever. Thus does  our  intellect  avenge  itself  on
those who deny its power to know what is  beyond  the  grasp  of  our  sense
knowledge. Thus does it assert man's rationality in the face  of  those  who
would reduce him to the level of the beasts.


Return now to the Last Supper. There, Christ did not  say:  “The  COLOUR  of
this bread is My Body,” or “The SHAPE of this bread is  My  Body,”  or  “The
QUANTITY of this bread is My Body.”  He  said  nothing  whatever  about  the
ACCIDENTS of the bread. He said instead, “THIS is My Body.” And  the  “this”
was the bread itself, the SUBSTANCE, not its colour, nor its shape, nor  its
quantity, nor any of its other accidents. It was not  THEY  He  changed.  It
was the SUBSTANCE, and it alone.


AND into what did He change it? Into the SUBSTANCE of His  BODY.  Into  what
did He change the  substance  of  the  wine?  Into  that  of  His  BLOOD.  A
prodigious change, this. One SUBSTANCE is completely  changed  into  another
SUBSTANCE, while its ACCIDENTS remain unchanged. Now,  you  see  why  it  is
called TRANSUBSTANTIATION. Try to realise, now, how  complete  a  change  it
is.


We can easily change the ACCIDENTS of a thing – an apple, for example  –  by
heating it, or cutting it in two, or shifting it from  a  box  to  a  fruit-
bowl. These changes affect only its  QUALITIES,  or  its  QUANTITY,  or  its
POSITION in place. In other words,  its  ACCIDENTS.  The  SUBSTANCE  remains
unchanged. It is still that of an apple. The change is  just  an  ACCIDENTAL
one.


Can we go further and change the apple SUBSTANTIALLY? Yes.  We  can  eat  it
and digest it. It then ceases to be an apple, and becomes part of our  body.
Here the SUBSTANCE as well as the accidents of the apple is changed. ALL  of
it? No. Only that part of it known  as  the  substantial  FORM.  The  MATTER
remains.


Now, transubstantiation is a far more complete change than this.  It  is  so
complete, in fact, that no creature can ever accomplish it  by  its  natural
power. Only God can do it. Why? Because in it not only the substantial  FORM
of a thing is changed, but also the MATTER. The COMPLETE  substance,  MATTER
and FORM, is changed into another substance so that nothing  remains  of  it
except its accidents. Is the substance  into  which  it  is  changed  itself
altered in any way? No. And the fact that it isn't is part of  the  glorious
mystery of transubstantiation.


We can sum this up by saying that TRANSUBSTANTIATION is a CHANGE, hence  not
a CREATION, nor an ANNIHILATION. And what is changed?  The  WHOLE  SUBSTANCE
of the bread and of the wine. Into  what  is  each  changed?  The  bread  is
changed into the BODY of Christ; the wine, into His BLOOD. And what  happens
to the ACCIDENTS  of  the  bread  and  of  the  wine?  These  remain  wholly
UNCHANGED. Does this imply any change  in  CHRIST?  No,  none  whatever.  He
Himself is in no way changed, not even by an accidental change in place.


Here, now, are some questions. Could God change a grain  of  dust  instantly
into a rose? Yes. A rose into a monkey? Yes. A man into an  angel?  Yes.  An
angel into God? No. He can change any creature into any other creature,  but
He cannot change a creature into God, or Himself into a creature.  Why  not?
Because He would then be DEPENDENT on a  creature.  As  the  SELF-  EXISTING
Being,  He  can  never  be  dependent  on  another.  That  would  involve  a
contradiction, like a square rhombus or an angel with false teeth. It  would
be an absurdity. In the Eucharist, bread is changed, not into God, but  into
the BODY OF CHRIST, which  belongs  indeed  to  the  Second  Person  of  the
Trinity, but which is a created reality like your own.


Is the substance of the bread annihilated? No. What is changed into  another
does not lapse into nothingness. Does  it  cease  to  be  the  substance  of
bread? Yes. It becomes that of Christ's Body. Does it add anything  to  Him?
No. Are new Bodies of Christ produced when many hosts  are  consecrated  No.
They are all consecrated into the one Body of Christ  which  already  exists
and   which   is   itself   unchanged.   What    an    astonishing    change
transubstantiation is! What  power  lies  behind  the  priest's  words  that
accomplish it daily in the Mass. They  are  weak  instruments,  indeed,  but
they have behind them the omnipotence of God.  By  accomplishing  what  they
signify, they show us how our Divine Saviour becomes present to us daily  in
the sacrament of His love.


6. Consequences.


     (a). The Accidents of Bread and Wine remain.


The words of consecration affect the  substance  only,  not  the  accidents.
Hence, the latter must remain  what  they  were  before  the  change  –  the
accidents of bread and wine.


By doing this they enable us to know, on God's authority,  the  PRESENCE  of
Christ. They tell us, too, how long His presence ENDURES; for He  ceases  to
be present only when the accidents under  which  He  hides  Himself  are  no
longer those of bread and wine.


How do they remain? God keeps the QUANTITY of the bread and wine  in  being,
and the other accidents exist in  it.  Does  this  mean  that  the  quantity
itself becomes a substance? No. It retains its natural APTITUDE to exist  in
another. So it remains an accident.


     (b). Body and Blood are separated sacramentally in the Mass.


The words: “This is My Body” accomplish ALL  that  they  signify,  but  ONLY
that. They change the bread into Christ's Body, but not into His Blood,  nor
into His Soul considered precisely not as form but as  something  spiritual,
nor into His Divinity. Similarly, the words: “This is My Blood”  change  the
wine into His Blood, but nothing else.


Hence, as far as the efficacy of the words themselves  is  concerned,  there
is manifested a SEPARATION of Christ's Body and  Blood  on  the  altar,  the
Body alone being present under the appearances of the bread, and  the  Blood
alone, under those of the wine. It is  very  necessary  to  take  this  into
account when trying to understand the Mass, as we  shall  see  in  the  next
chapter.


     (c). The Whole Christ is present under the  Appearance  of  the  Bread,
and also under those of the Wine.


When you receive Holy Communion, you receive not only Our Lord's  Body,  but
also His Blood, His Soul and His Divinity. Why? Because, although  only  His
Body is present in the Host by the power of the words of  consecration,  the
rest of Him is there by what is called CONCOMITANCE.


This word comes from a Latin verb meaning “to accompany as a companion.”  It
means simply this: Wherever Christ's Body now is, there also are  His  Blood
and His Soul, since the natural connection between these and  His  Body  has
been restored by the resurrection. There, too, is his Divinity,  since  this
has never for a moment been separated from His Humanity, and never  can  be.
The Hypostatic Union will endure forever.


Hence, Our Lord can say: “He that eateth ME, the same  also  shall  live  by
Me.” (John 6:58). The “Me” shows that the whole Christ  is  present  in  the
Host. This, too, is why the Church can sing to the Host: “Jesu quem  velatum
nunc aspicio.” It is Jesus Himself, not  just  His  Body,  which  is  veiled
under the  appearances  of  the  bread.  And  again:  “Deus  qui  nobis  sub
sacramento mirabili passionis tuae memoriam  reliquisti.”  Here,  Christ  in
the Host exposed at Benediction is addressed as God;  so  it  is  the  whole
Christ who is there, not just His Body.


     (d). Christ is present with His Actual Dimensions or Natural Stature.


A material thing as normally present in a place by reason  of  its  QUANTITY
or DIMENSIONS – the book on your desk, for instance. Hence, it  is  said  to
be present CIRCUMSCRIPTIVELY, inasmuch as it is circumscribed or  surrounded
by material things with which it has PHYSICAL CONTACT. This is  the  way  in
which Christ is present in heaven. His SUBSTANCE is  present  by  reason  of
the QUANTITY in His Body.


Now, in the Eucharist this is REVERSED.  There,  the  QUANTITY  in  Christ's
Body is present by reason of the SUBSTANCE,  since  He  becomes  present  by
transubstantiation. Hence the quantity has to take on the MODE  OF  PRESENCE
proper to a SUBSTANCE. But, since a substance as such has NO DIMENSIONS,  it
is superior to all the laws of SPACE  and  DISTANCE.  It  is  right  OUTSIDE
them. They cannot APPLY to it in any way.


This is why Our Lord can be present in many Hosts in different parts of  the
world at the same time. This is why He does  not  have  to  become  tiny  in
order to fit into the little Host. He does not fit  into  it,  since  He  is
present in such a way that He has NO  PHYSICAL  CONTACT  whatever  with  the
material things about Him. This, again, is why He cannot  be  said  to  COME
DOWN from heaven to the altar; and why  it  is  nonsense  to  speak  of  the
DISTANCE between Christ in a Host at Timaru and Christ in one in  any  other
part of the world.


Present in a way in which a SUBSTANCE is present, He is FREED entirely  from
the limits imposed by SPACE, and by TIME too, for that matter;  since  these
are imposed only on things that are present by reason of their  QUANTITY  or
DIMENSIONS. Hence, while Our Divine Lord can be present only  in  one  place
at a time in heaven, He can be present in countless places at the same  time
on earth in consecrated Hosts and Chalices. Thus can he  fill  His  yearning
to be with us in Person, in all places and at all times, even to the end  of
the world.


     (e). Christ is present in every Part of the Host.


Since Our Lord is present in the Eucharist in the way in which  a  substance
is present, He must be WHOLLY present in the WHOLE Host, and also  in  every
PART of it, just as the substance of the book is on your desk.


If, therefore a Host is divided and you are  given  a  portion  of  it,  you
receive Our Lord just as completely as if you had received the entire  Host.



“But,” you may object, “Christ is God. God is everywhere.  Therefore  Christ
too is everywhere. Why, then, all this insistence on  His  presence  in  the
Eucharist?” Christ is God, indeed; and God is truly everywhere. But does  it
follow that wherever God is, there too is Christ? No. A comparison may  help
you to see why. Wherever your toe is, there also is your soul; but  it  does
not follow that wherever your soul is, there too is  your  toe.  Your  soul,
after all, is also in your  head,  but  your  toe  is  not  there  with  it.
Similarly, it is right to say that wherever the sacred  Humanity  is,  there
also is the Divinity. Why? Because the Human Nature  in  Christ  is  utterly
dependent on His Divinity for its very being, just as your toe  is  on  your
soul. But it is false to say that wherever the Divinity  is,  there  too  is
Christ's Humanity. Why Because His Divinity is in no way  dependent  on  His
Humanity, any more than your soul is on your toe. So, in spite of  the  fact
that God is everywhere, we still have to study the Real Presence  of  Christ
in the Eucharist.


7. The Eucharist is a Sacrament.


The Eucharist is obviously an  efficacious  sign  of  grace,  instituted  by
Christ alone.  Hence,  it  is  a  sacrament.  It  is  in  fact  the  central
Sacrament, the one for which all the others exist. Remember  the  infallible
definition of Trent.


The MATTER is the bread and the wine. The FORM is  found  in  the  words  of
consecration. The SIGN ONLY is seen in the accidents of the bread and  wine.
The THING AND SIGN is the Real Body and Blood of Christ hidden  under  them.
The THING ONLY is the special grace given by this sacrament.


8. Conditions for Receiving Holy Communion.


To receive Communion one must be BAPTISED, in a state of GRACE, and  FASTING
from midnight.[1]


Why baptised? Because baptism is necessary for the valid  reception  of  any
of the other sacraments. Why in grace? Because food is given to the  living,
not to the dead; and the Eucharist is the food of our  souls.  Why  fasting?
Because of the respect due to Our Lord, who should have first place  in  our
hearts.


To fast here means to abstain from all FOOD AND DRINK. To break the fast,  a
thing must in the first place be DIGESTIBLE, not something  that  cannot  be
digested such as a toothbrush bristle or a bit of cotton. Secondly, it  must
be taken into the mouth from the OUTSIDE, and it must  be  swallowed.  Thus,
water used in cleaning the teeth does not break  the  fast  provided  it  is
ejected. Nor does blood from one's nose provided it does  not  pass  through
the mouth. Thirdly, it must be taken in the normal  way  in  which  we  take
food, not just swallowed accidentally in the way a person  might  swallow  a
butterfly while talking too much on the way to church.


There are, naturally, exceptions to this law of fast. Anyone  in  danger  of
death, for instance, may receive Communion even when not  fasting.  Invalids
who have been in bed for a month and who have no certain  hope  of  a  quick
recovery may receive Communion once or twice a week, though they have  taken
some LIQUID as medicine or nourishment beforehand.


9. Effects of Holy Communion.

1.   It unites us intimately to Christ, who comes to us in Person.
2.   It unites us also to our fellowmen. It is  the  bond  of  the  Mystical
   Body.
3.   It gives abundant graces, since it contains the Author of grace.
4.   It increases especially the intensity of our charity.
5.   It increases with it the functioning of the Gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost
   which give infused contemplation.
6.   It does in the supernatural  order  all  that  our  food  does  in  the
   natural; it sustains, strengthens, repairs, and delights us.
7.   It gradually makes our body like that of Our Lord.
8.   It thus gives us ever more and more control over our passions,  and  so
   restores to a certain extent the integrity enjoyed by Adam.
9.   It enables us to act as host to our Divine Lord who is our Guest.
10.  It gives us a title to a specially glorious resurrection.

One Communion received with perfect dispositions would make  each  of  us  a
saint. We should therefore prepare well for  this  great  sacrament.  During
Mass,  we  can  do  this  best  by  following  the  prayers  in  the  Missal
intelligently and devoutly. We should  also  make  a  suitable  thanksgiving
after Communion, since Our Lord remains for about a quarter of  an  hour  in
our soul. It is best to speak to Him as our infinitely  lovable  Friend,  in
prayers that well up spontaneously from the depths of our heart. But  if  we
find this difficult, we can think of the word ALTAR. The A  will  remind  us
to ADORE Him; the L, to LOVE Him; the T, to THANK Him; the second A, to  ASK
Him for good things for ourselves and others; and the R, to RESOLVE to  love
Him better in  future.  Or  we  can  read  suitable  prayers  to  Him.  Some
excellent prayers were written by the saints.


The best preparation and the best thanksgiving  we  can  make,  however,  is
that made by conforming our will all day and every day to the will  of  God,
so that everything we do or suffer  is  an  act  of  loving  homage  to  His
adorable majesty, and a thanksgiving for His gifts.


We should also love to visit the Blessed Sacrament as often as  we  can.  We
should visit our Lord especially at Benediction and at other times  when  He
is exposed on the altar for our  adoration  and  love.  Finally,  we  should
practise some devotion to the Eucharist – that  of  the  Eucharistic  Heart,
for example, since countless graces can be obtained from His Real  Presence,
just as they could when He was visibly present on earth. He is the same  now
as He was then.


Above all, let us try to realise that the Eucharist together with  the  Mass
is our greatest treasure. Let us be always on our guard lest custom mar  our
appreciation of its wonder. Instead, let us marvel daily more  and  more  at
this infinitely precious Gift, as did St. Thomas Aquinas who wrote:  “O  res
mirabilis, manducat Dominum pauper, servus et humilis.”


10. Practical Conclusions.


1. I should receive Communion very often – daily if I can.


2. I should make a good preparation and thanksgiving.


3. I should try to visit Our Lord in the Eucharist every day.


4. I should never miss Benediction when I can be present at it.


5. I should practise the devotion to the Eucharistic Heart of Christ.

                                   SUMMARY
1. Christ's Promise:
 (a). What it was.
 (b). How the Jews understood it.
 (c). How Christ approved of their interpretation.
 (d). How He re-acted to their refusal to accept it.
2. Its Fulfilment:
 (a). Christ's words at the Last Supper.
 (b). Why they must be taken in their proper sense.
3. St. Paul's Testimony:
 (a). In regard to unworthy Communions.
 (b). In regard to idolatry.
4. Tradition:
 i. Early Documents. ii. The Fathers. iii. Drawings. iv. Inscriptions. v.
 Heretics.
5. How He Becomes Present:
 (a). Substance and accident.
 (b). Kinds of change: Accidental; substantial; transubstantiation.
 (c). Why transubstantiation is unique.
6. Consequences:
 (a). The accidents of bread and wine remain.
 (b). Body and Blood separated sacramentally.
 (c). Whole Christ under either species.
 (d). Christ present with His natural dimensions.
 (e). Christ present in every part of the Host.
7. A Sacrament:
 (a). Its matter and form.
 (b). Sign Only; Thing and Sign. Thing Only.
 (c). Definition of Trent.
8. Its Worthy Reception:
 i. Baptised. ii. Grace. iii. Fasting. iv. Exceptions to the Fast.
9. Its Effects:
 i. Union with Christ. ii. Union with fellowmen. iii. Increase of grace.
 iv. Increase of charity. v. Increase of gifts. vi. Supernatural
 nourishment. vii. Assimilation to Christ. viii. Integrity. ix. Privilege
 of acting as host to God. x. Glorious resurrection.
10. Practical Conclusions.
                                  EXERCISES

(A). Fill in the blanks and cross out wrong alternatives in  the  following:
–
1. Christ said “I am the (......) of life.” 2. Again: “The (......)  that  I
will give is My (......) for the (......) of the world.” 3. The  Jews  said:
“How can this man give us his flesh to (......)?” 4. Christ replied:  “Amen,
amen I say unto you, except you eat the (......)  of  the  Son  of  Man  and
drink His (......), you shall not have (......) in you.” 5.  Again:  For  My
flesh is meat (......) and My Blood  is  drink  (......).”  6.  Peter  said:
“Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of  (......);  and  we  have
believed and have known that  Thou  art  the  (......),  the  (......).”  7.
Christ fulfilled His promise at the (......). 8. He  said  over  the  bread:
“This (......),” and over the wine: “This (......).” 9. He was  then  making
His last (......), and also imposing a (......). 10.  St.  Paul  blamed  his
converts for not discerning in the Eucharist “the  (......)  of  the  Lord.”
11. The letters in “ikthos” are the initial letters  of  Our  Lord's  title,
(......). 12. This word was used to  comply  with  the  “Discipline  of  the
(......). 13. All heretics who broke away during the  first  thousand  years
(believed) (rejected) the doctrine of the Real Presence. 14.  All  realities
are either substances or (......). 15. The words of consecration change  the
(substance) (accidents) of the bread and wine. 16.  This  change  is  called
(......). 17. The words of  consecration  change  the  (matter  only)  (form
only) (matter and form) of the  bread  and  wine.  18.  God  (can)  (cannot)
change a creature into Himself. 19. God (can) (cannot)  instantly  change  a
monkey into an angel. 20. After the consecration, God keeps the (......)  of
the bread and wine in being, and the other accidents exist in  it.  21.  The
words of  consecration  put  only  (......)  of  Christ  present  under  the
appearances of the bread; but  the  rest  of  Our  Lord  is  also  there  by
(......). 22. Christ (has) (has not) His natural stature in  the  Host.  23.
He (is) (is not) wholly present in every part of the Host. 24. He  (is)  (is
not) present circumscriptively in the Eucharist. 25. There,  He  (has)  (has
not) physical contact with things about Him. 26. It (is)  (is  not)  correct
to say that He comes down from heaven to the altar. 27. In the Eucharist  He
(is) (is not) distant from Himself in heaven. 28. The special effect of  the
Eucharist is to increase one of  the  supernatural  virtues.  Which  is  it?
(......). 29. With  it,  it  increases  the  Gifts  which  give  us  infused
(......). 30. The Eucharist is an infinitely precious treasure,  because  it
is (......) under the appearances of bread and wine.

(B). Answer each of the following as fully as you can: –
1.   In regard to Christ's promise, explain:  What  it  was;  how  the  Jews
  interpreted it; how Christ approved of their interpretation; how  He  re-
  acted to their refusal to accept it; how the Apostles acted.
2.   Show how He fulfilled His promise at  the  Last  Supper;  and  why  His
  Words must be taken in their literal or proper sense.
3.   In what ways does St. Paul testify to the Real Presence?
4.   What has Tradition to tell us about the Eucharist?
5.   Explain what is meant by an accidental change;  a  substantial  change;
  transubstantiation.
6.   What consequences follow from transubstantiation?
7.   What conditions should we have for receiving Holy  Communion?  How  can
  we make a good preparation and a good thanksgiving?  What  are  the  main
  effects of Holy Communion?
8. In what ways can we show our devotion to Our Lord in  the  sacraments  of
  His love?
-----------------------
[1] [Editor’s note]. Canon Law now prescribes that “One who  is  to  receive
the Most Holy Eucharist is to abstain from  any  food  or  drink,  with  the
exception only of water and medicine, for at least  a  period  of  one  hour
before Holy Communion.” (Can. 919).

