


                                 Chapter 47


                           THE MASS AS A SACRIFICE


1. Our Primary Duty.


In Chapter Seven we saw how  reason  proves  that  God  exists  as  a  SELF-
EXISTING Being; that He is our Creator, Conserver, and Last  End;  and  that
we are His creatures wholly dependent on Him. From this, it follows that  we
are OBLIGED to acknowledge His infinite excellence and to  submit  ourselves
entirely to Him. This is to ADORE Him. Inseparably connected  with  this  is
our obligation to THANK Him, since all the reality in us  comes  unceasingly
from Him; to  make  REPARATION  for  sin,  because  it  offends  His  august
dignity; and to ASK for whatever can help us to gain  heaven,  the  end  for
which He has created us.


To do this is simply to be HONEST towards God. It is  to  practise  JUSTICE.
It is to exercise the virtue of RELIGION by paying our Creator the  debt  of
homage due to Him. To refuse to pay our homage  to  God  is  a  far  greater
crime against reason and against our nature as rational  beings  than  is  a
child's refusal to  acknowledge  his  relationship  to  his  parents,  or  a
traitor's betrayal of allegiance  to  his  country.  It  is  denial  of  our
condition as creatures, a mad claim to be self-existing, the  sin  of  pride
that once hurled Satan like lightning into hell.


Now,  adoration,  thanksgiving,  reparation  and  petition   are   SPIRITUAL
DISPOSITIONS hidden in our intellect and will, invisible to others.  But  we
all feel the need of MANIFESTING these externally in some way. Why?  Because
it is the whole man, body as well as soul, that must worship God.  Moreover,
since we are SOCIAL beings, we must pay homage to our Creator  in  a  public
manner, in company with our fellowmen.  Finally,  sentiments  that  are  not
expressed outwardly easily become extinct. For these reasons,  then,  it  is
natural for us to worship God by visible actions  that  manifest  externally
the good dispositions hidden in our soul.


We can do this by PRAYER, as we saw in  Chapter  41.  But  we  can  pray  to
saints as well as to God. And our nature demands  an  external  act  of  the
virtue of religion which cannot rightly be offered to any being  other  than
God. It demands an act RESERVED to Him since both  His  excellence  and  our
relationship to Him are unique.


Every day we honour our  fellow-men  by  actions  that  show  reverence  and
respect. We shake hands, we bow, we raise our hats, we even  bend  our  knee
as when we kneel to kiss a bishop's ring. Nor  are  these  marks  of  honour
shown haphazardly. Special offices have their  own  particular  tributes  of
respect which may not be paid to others. Think of a King,  a  President,  an
Ambassador, a Cardinal, a Pope. But, if human beings have thus  reserved  to
them special gestures of respect on account of the office they hold,  surely
it is infinitely more reasonable for us to  reserve  to  GOD  a  gesture  of
homage which may be given to no one else, since He is  the  King  of  Kings,
the Lord of Lords, unique  in  excellence,  infinite  in  every  perfection.
What, now, is this act of homage due to God alone?


2. Sacrifice.


The history of mankind from its very beginning to  the  present  day  proves
that this act of homage is that which we call SACRIFICE.


Not much is told us in Genesis about Adam's  children,  but  in  the  little
that is said there is mention  of  the  fact  that  Cain  and  Abel  offered
sacrifices to God, the former from the fruits of the earth, the latter  from
his flock. The Bible also tells us that the first thing Noah did  on  coming
out of the Ark was to offer a holocaust to God. All the Patriarchs paid  Him
this same distinctive mark of homage. And,  under  the  Law  of  Moses,  God
Himself gave His People detailed  regulations  concerning  the  offering  of
sacrifice.


Even the pagans worshipped God in the same  way,  no  matter  how  distorted
their ideas of the Divinity might  have  become,  or  how  low  their  moral
standards might have sunk. Thus Job offered sacrifices for the sins  of  his
children; and Plutarch in his day could write: “You may find cities  without
walls, mansions, gymnasiums, laws, the use  of  money,  or  a  knowledge  of
letters; but a people without God, without prayers, without  oaths,  without
religious rites, without SACRIFICE, no one ever sees.” And today, those  who
devote their lives to this particular branch of study assure us  that  there
never has been a people with any culture worthy of the  name  who  have  not
offered sacrifice to God.


Sacrifice, then, is natural to man, just as speech is.  It  is  demanded  by
his very nature. It flows from the very depths of his being  as  a  rational
creature.


Why, now, is sacrifice the one act of homage reserved to God? Because by  it
a creature is offered to God and  immolated  or  destroyed  in  a  way  that
expresses His supreme DOMINION over us, and our absolute SUBJECTION to  Him.
Hence, this act honours  God  precisely  inasmuch  as  He  is  our  CREATOR,
CONSERVER and LAST END. And, since God alone  is  this,  it  is  necessarily
reserved to Him. To offer sacrifice to any creature, no  matter  how  noble,
would be to honour that creature as God. It would be a grave insult to  Him.
It would be the heinous sin of idolatry.


From what has been said, you can see that a sacrifice involves in the  first
place certain DISPOSITIONS of soul  in  the  offerer,  especially  those  of
homage and subjection to God. These dispositions are all-important.  Without
them the external act would be mere hypocrisy; hence, hateful to God.  Think
of Cain's sacrifice.


These dispositions are then manifested externally in a visible action  which
consists in the OBLATION and  IMMOLATION  of  a  victim.  Both  are  needed.
Merely to OFFER a thing to God is not enough to make a sacrifice. The  first
fruits offered of old by the Jews were not a  sacrifice.  Neither  is  money
put in the plate by the faithful  today.  Something  must  be  done  TO  the
object offered  –  something  that  expresses  our  ADORATION.  In  the  Old
Testament, for instance, the blood of animals  was  poured  over  the  altar
which represented God. Thus it was given over or made sacred  to  Him  in  a
way that testified to His supreme  dominion  over  all  creatures,  and  our
complete  subjection  and  self-donation  to  Him.  Every  sacrifice  is  an
oblation, of course; but not every oblation is a sacrifice,  just  as  every
human being is an animal, but not every animal is a human  being.  In  other
words, immolation is the FORMAL or determining  element  in  any  sacrifice,
just as the soul is the formal element in man.


This external action, remember, is by its very  nature  a  SIGN.  Its  whole
purpose is to manifest outwardly the inner dispositions that are  hidden  in
the offerer's soul. It gets all  its  RELIGIOUS  value  from  them.  Without
them, it is but an empty, insincere gesture, an insult  to  God,  and  quite
unworthy of man.


Once we realise that the external action in a sacrifice is a  SIGN,  we  can
see that a SACRAMENTAL SACRIFICE  can  be  a  true  sacrifice  in  the  very
strictest sense of the term. For what is  a  sacrament  but  an  efficacious
SIGN? And the Eucharist, as we shall see, is a sign of  a  SACRIFICE  –  the
great sacrifice of Calvary, Christ's death, which it frees from  the  limits
of time and place, and renders present daily on our altars.


Finally, we should note that a sacrifice is offered by  a  person  specially
authorised to offer it; and that he acts, not merely in his  own  name,  but
on behalf of the COMMUNITY he represents. Such a person is called a  PRIEST.
He is a mediator between men and God.


3. The Central Sacrifice.


On Calvary, Christ offered to His Heavenly Father a  sacrifice  of  infinite
worth. There, He freely accepted death in obedience to  His  Father's  will.
He was at the same time  both  Priest  and  Victim  of  His  sacrifice.  His
dispositions of homage and subjection were the most perfect  possible  in  a
human heart. And, because His acts were those of the Second  Person  of  the
Trinity, their value was infinite. Hence, His sacrifice  could  not  but  be
pleasing to His Father, and so accepted by Him.  Its  acceptance,  in  fact,
was shown in Our Saviour's resurrection from the dead and in  His  ascension
in glory to heaven.


We  have  called  Calvary  the  CENTRAL  Sacrifice  because  from  it  every
sacrifice previously offered from the days of Adam derived all its  efficacy
and its power of pleasing God. So has  every  sacrifice  offered  since.  So
will every sacrifice yet to be offered, on to the end of the world.  Calvary
was the altar of the world. Its sacrifice belonged  exclusively  neither  to
the Old Testament nor to the New. It was for all men, from Adam to the  last
human being who will live on earth. All previous history looked  forward  to
it. All subsequent history looks back to it, and will look  back  to  it  to
the end. It is the central event in the entire history of man.


In the Sacrifice of the Cross the Victim offered to the Father was in  every
way worthy  of  Him.  So  was  the  Priest  who  offered  it.  So  were  the
dispositions of obedience, subjection and love that filled  His  heart.  For
the Priest and Victim was Christ Himself, the  Father's  only  begotten  Son
who had become Man to die for us. In the immolation of this all holy  Victim
God's supreme dominion over creatures was  abundantly  manifested;  and,  at
the same time, full satisfaction  was  made  for  sin.  Thus,  the  Father's
honour was restored, and the human race was redeemed by a perfect  Sacrifice
in which the adoration, thanksgiving and reparation were infinite.


4. The Last Supper.


In Chapter 46. we saw how Our Divine Lord at the  Last  Supper  hid  Himself
under the appearances of bread and wine. We saw too how, on account  of  the
manner in which He is present in the Eucharist He  is  there  placed  beyond
the limits of TIME and PLACE. Time and place have to do with  QUANTITY.  And
Christ is present in the Eucharist, not by reason of His  quantity,  but  by
reason of His substance which, like any other substance,  is  right  OUTSIDE
the order of time and space, quite superior to them, and  able  consequently
to transcend and conquer the limitations they impose. This  is  why,  as  we
saw, it is false to speak  of  Christ's  coming  down  from  heaven  to  our
altars; and why it is nonsense to talk  of  His  being  there  distant  from
Himself in heaven. And, just as distance is eliminated by the manner of  His
presence in the sacrament of His love, so too is time, since it  is  equally
dependent on quantity.


No sacrament looks solely to the PRESENT. All  of  them  look  also  to  the
PAST, to the Cross whence they derive their power of sanctifying us. At  the
same time they all look to the FUTURE,  to  the  beatific  vision  which  is
their goal, since the grace they give is  nothing  else  than  eternal  life
already begun on earth. In this, the  Eucharist  is  no  exception.  On  the
contrary, as the most perfect of the sacraments, it conquers time and  place
more completely than the others, by reason of the manner in which Christ  is
present under the appearances of bread and wine.


Now, try to realise this. Just as Our Divine Lord  freed  HIMSELF  from  the
limits of time and place as far as His Eucharistic  presence  is  concerned,
so too by the DOUBLE CONSECRATION which He  made  at  the  Last  Supper,  He
freed His SACRIFICE from these  same  limits.  He  put  CALVARY  beyond  the
limitations of time and place, so that it could be present in a  sacramental
manner, just as He Himself could, on countless altars throughout the  world,
on to the end of time.


Recall what He did at the Supper. He took bread in His hands and  said  over
it: “This is My Body  which  is  given  for  you”  –  given,  obviously,  in
sacrifice, in death. Then He took wine and said over it: “This is  My  Blood
which is shed for you” – shed, again, in sacrifice, in  death.  These  words
must have accomplished what  they  signified.  Otherwise,  Our  Divine  Lord
would have uttered a lie. This is infinitely impossible.  Hence,  they  must
have changed the substance of the bread into  that  of  His  Body,  and  the
substance of  the  wine  into  that  of  His  Blood,  thus  SEPARATING  them
sacramentally.  In  doing  this,  He  freed  Calvary's  sacrifice  from  the
limitations  of  time  and  place,  so  that  His  DEATH   could   be   made
sacramentally present on thousands of altars in every century right  to  the
end of the world.


Then, to make sure that  it  would  be  thus  rendered  present  to  us,  He
commanded His Apostles to do what He had  done.  “Do  THIS,”  He  said,  “in
commemoration of Me.”


Have they and their successors been faithful to His command?  Think  of  the
Mass you attended this morning, and you will see.


5. The Mass.


Each day at Mass the priest takes bread into His hands and  says:  “This  is
My Body.” Then he takes wine and says: “This is My  Blood.”  Acting  in  the
name and in the very Person of Christ in virtue of the  CHARACTER  imprinted
indelibly on his soul by ordination, the priest does what Christ did in  the
Supper room. By  the  double  consecration  which  he  effects  as  Christ's
minister, he renders present the death that Christ underwent on Calvary.


He thus puts present on the altar the  great  Sacrifice  of  Calvary,  in  a
hidden manner, indeed, yet  just  as  really  as  He  puts  Christ  Himself.
Moreover, He puts it present in such a way that other  priests  can  do  the
same on countless other altars throughout the world.  Finally,  he  puts  it
present in such a way that we can all take an active part in it by  offering
it in union with Christ to the Father as  OUR  sacrifice,  and  thus  fulfil
perfectly the debt of worship due to Him.


It is impossible that Our loving Saviour should  have  failed  to  give  His
perfect religion a sacrifice. Sacrifice, as we  have  said,  is  natural  to
man. It is demanded by his very nature as a rational creature. It fulfils  a
profound yearning of his soul. And religion does  not  stifle  or  root  out
such natural yearnings. It fulfils them instead. And it fulfils  them  in  a
manner that  surpasses  our  wildest  dreams,  for  it  fulfils  them  in  a
supernatural way by ennobling and  elevating  them  to  an  order  which  is
natural only to God.


This is why Our Divine Saviour gave us a sacrifice. And  it  is  in  keeping
with His infinite generosity and love, for it is none other  than  the  all-
perfect Sacrifice of the Cross, made present to us daily  in  the  Mass,  so
that it becomes OUR Sacrifice as well as His, and thus enables  us  to  give
His Father a worship worthy of Him, a homage of infinite worth.


6. The Mass and Calvary.


The Mass is SUBSTANTIALLY the same  sacrifice  as  that  of  the  Cross.  To
understand this, let us compare these two sacrifices from the point of  view
of their four causes.  This will show us in what  ways  they  agree  and  in
what ways they differ.


The EFFICIENT cause in any sacrifice is the PRIEST who offers it. From  this
point of view, the Mass and Calvary are the same inasmuch as Christ was  the
Priest on Calvary, and He is also the principal Priest in  the  Mass.  There
is a difference, however; for on the Cross Christ was the  sole  Offerer  of
the Sacrifice, whereas in the Mass He offers  it  through  the  ministry  of
another who can act in His name and as  His  instrument  in  virtue  of  the
character he has received at ordination.


What, now, of the MATERIAL cause? This  in  any  sacrifice  is  the  VICTIM.
Here, again, the  Mass  is  one  with  Calvary  since  the  Victim  in  each
Sacrifice is Christ.


When we consider the FORMAL cause, however,  there  is  a  difference.  Why?
Because the formal cause is the IMMOLATION. On the Cross this was  one  that
implied the PHYSICAL separation of Christ's Body and  Blood,  since  He  was
present there under His OWN appearances and  in  His  natural  condition  as
Man. In the Mass, on the contrary, the immolation  is  accomplished  by  the
twofold CONSECRATION of the bread and of the wine,  so  that  it  is  not  a
physical but a SACRAMENTAL immolation, since Christ is present on the  altar
under species that are not His own. In the Mass, then, Our Saviour does  not
die again. Nor is the Mass  a  mere  representation  of  His  death.  It  is
infinitely more than that. It is the very sacrifice  He  once  underwent  on
the Cross, freed from the limits of time and place, and made really  present
under the appearances of bread and wine.


Lastly, there is  the  FINAL  cause  which  is  the  END  achieved  by  each
sacrifice. In each, the primary  purpose  is  the  same:  to  give  God  the
worship or homage due to His infinite dignity as our Creator, Conserver  and
Last End. But there is this difference as  far  as  the  benefit  to  US  is
concerned:  on  Calvary  Our  Saviour  won  merits  for  us  all  and   made
satisfaction for the sins of all mankind, whereas in  the  Mass  He  APPLIES
these to individual souls.


Thus, the Mass is indeed substantially one with the  Cross.  It  is  Calvary
made present in the SACRAMENTAL order. It is Christ's  great  Sacrifice  put
at OUR disposal, made OURS as well as His, so that by offering it  in  union
with His, we can fulfil perfectly our debt of worship to God.


7. Our Part in the Mass.


The priest at the altar represents Christ, indeed, for he  speaks  and  acts
in His name when he utters the  words of consecration.  At  the  same  time,
however, he represents YOU, and with you  all  other  Christians.  When  you
assist at Mass, it is YOUR sacrifice that is  offered.  The  priest  reminds
you of this when, having washed his hands and said a  short  prayer  to  the
Trinity begging that the sacrifice he is about to offer  may  be  acceptable
to God, he turns towards the people  and  says:  “Pray,  brethren,  that  MY
sacrifice and YOURS may become acceptable to God the Father Almighty.”


Absolutely nothing, obviously, can be lacking in  Our  Saviour's  sacrifice,
inasmuch as it is offered by Him. But the Mass is OUR sacrifice as  well  as
His. And much may be lacking in US who  offer  it  in  union  with  Him.  In
offering it, remember, we are at the same time offering OURSELVES to God.


Every sacrifice, as we have seen, implies certain DISPOSITIONS in  the  soul
of the offerer, especially those of complete SUBJECTION,  complete  DONATION
OF SELF to God.


What matters most in US, therefore, when we offer the  Mass  in  union  with
Christ and His priest who represents us at  the  altar,  is  the  extent  to
which we IMITATE the dispositions that are in Our Saviour's  Heart  at  this
august moment, the dispositions that He had when He yielded up His  soul  to
His Father from the Cross. Like Our Saviour we must  GIVE  OURSELVES  wholly
to God, by subjecting ourselves wholly to Him and conforming  every  one  of
our thoughts, words and deeds to His infinitely wise and holy will.


St. Gregory bids us do this when he writes: “During this holy  function,  we
must offer OURSELVES with sorrow of heart  as  a  SACRIFICE;  for,  when  we
commemorate the mystery of the Passion of Our Lord,  WE  MUST  IMITATE  THAT
WHICH WE CELEBRATE. The Mass will be  a  sacrifice  for  us,  when  we  have
offered OURSELVES to God.” This offering of ourselves, remember, involves  a
great deal. It involves the complete subjection of our WILL to God's.


In his Encyclical on “Reparation” Pope Pius XI gives us the same advice.  He
says: “With the august  sacrifice  of  the  Eucharist  must  be  united  the
IMMOLATION of the ministers and also the rest of the faithful, so that  they
too may offer THEMSELVES A LIVING SACRIFICE to  God.”  He  then  adds:  “The
more perfectly our oblation and our sacrifice correspond  to  the  sacrifice
of Christ – in other words, the more we SACRIFICE SELF-LOVE,  OUR  PASSIONS,
AND CRUCIFY OUR FLESH, the more abundant will be the fruits we  receive  for
ourselves and for others.”


And this total subjection of our  will  to  God's,  remember,  must  not  be
merely a passing disposition present in our soul while we are  at  Mass.  It
must be an enduring one, LIVED ALL DAY AND EVERY DAY,  through  the  willing
acceptance of crosses and sufferings, and the constant SELF DENIAL  entailed
in avoiding sin and living wholly for God.


The Mass, then, is not a sort of drama which we have to look  at  or  listen
to in a PASSIVE way, as mere spectators. We have to take a very ACTIVE  part
in it, by offering  it  in  union  with  Christ  to  God,  and  by  offering
OURSELVES along with Our Saviour, and sacrificing  OURSELVES  by  subjecting
our wills ever more and more perfectly to His.


If, for example, we realise that we have offended against  charity,  let  us
think of Our Lord's words: “If,  therefore,  thou  offer  thy  gift  at  the
altar, and there thou remember that thy brother hath anything against  thee,
leave there thy offering before the altar, and go first  and  be  reconciled
to thy brother; and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift.” (Mat.  5:23-24).
Similarly, if we retain sinful affections for worldly things, or if we  lack
patience in trials, or obedience to lawful authority – if we prefer self  in
any way to God, let us think of St. Paul's words to the Romans:  “I  beseech
you by the  mercy  of  God  that  you  may  present  your  bodies  A  LIVING
SACRIFICE, holy, pleasing  unto  God.”  (Roms.  12:1).  And  let  us  remedy
things, not by ceasing to go to Mass, but  by  stirring  up  in  our  hearts
dispositions of self donation that will enable us to profit by  this  august
sacrifice. In a word, let us LIVE the Mass in our daily  life,  in  all  our
acts and sufferings, by conforming our wills in all things to God's.


8. The Value of the Mass.


The Mass is a sacrifice, and the primary end of a sacrifice  is  the  GIVING
of something to GOD, not the RECEIVING of something from Him.  The  greatest
value of the Mass, then, consists in this: it enables us  to  offer  God  an
adoration, a thanksgiving, a reparation for sin and a petition that  are  of
INFINITE value. Hence it enables us to fulfil perfectly our primary duty  of
paying Him the homage due to Him as our Creator, Conserver and Last End.


However, it is  impossible  for  us  to  give  to  God  without  His  giving
something in return. Hence, the Mass brings benefits to us.  Here  are  some
of them.


It forgives sin, mortal as well as venial. How? By the ACTUAL  GRACES  which
it offers to the sinner. This does not mean that a person who  attends  Mass
in mortal sin will have this sin forgiven infallibly. But it does mean  that
he will receive sufficient grace to make an act of  perfect  contrition.  He
may, however, refuse to use this grace, and so remain in sin.


It also abolishes temporal punishment. Provided sin has been  forgiven,  the
Mass will do away with at least some of the temporal punishment due  to  it.
It can do away with all of it, if the dispositions in the  sinner  are  such
as to allow it to have its full effect. This does not mean that we  can  buy
our way out of purgatory by having Masses said after death. The dead  profit
by Masses said for them to the extent that they MERITED to benefit  by  them
when they were alive.


It obtains spiritual and temporal goods for us. It can do  this  because  it
is a perfect prayer. Thus, it is a good thing for us to have Masses  offered
for the grace of a happy death,  for  our  progress  in  sanctity,  for  the
conversion of others, and  so  on.  God  may  not  give  us  the  particular
temporal benefits we ask for, but He will give us something better  –  peace
of mind, for instance, and resignation to His will.


Lastly, at the Mass we  are  able  to  receive  Holy  Communion.  It  is  an
integral part of the Mass. In it, God gives us His  only  begotten  Son  who
comes as our Divine Guest into the depths  of  our  soul,  to  increase  our
supernatural charity and with it our union with God.


From what has been said in this Chapter, however inadequate it may  be,  you
can see that the Mass is indeed the crowning act of Our Saviour's  religion.



A pulpit from which His words are  repeated  is  not  enough  to  constitute
Christianity. Nor is a choir in which sweet Christian sentiments  are  sung.
Christianity is much more than a pulpit, much  more  than  a  choir.  It  is
above all else an ALTAR from which there is sent us daily to God  a  worship
worthy of Him, in a sacramental SACRIFICE which is  substantially  the  same
as that of the Cross, and  which  consequently  brings  down  from  God  the
merits and satisfactions won for us by His  Son,  and  distributes  them  to
individual souls. Let us therefore cherish the Mass. Let us love it. Let  us
try to appreciate its worth more deeply every day. Let not  use  and  custom
mar our appreciation of it. Let us treasure it as the supreme gift  left  us
by our loving Saviour. Above all let us LIVE in it our daily life by  making
our dispositions of subjection and self donation to God ever more  and  more
like those that filled the noble Heart of Christ at the Last Supper  and  on
the Cross.

9. Practical Conclusions.
1.   I should never miss Mass when I can reasonably be expected to go.
2.   I should take a very active part  in  the  Mass,  and  not  be  just  a
  passive spectator.
3.   I should always be in time for Mass, and remain there to the end.
4.   I should receive Holy Communion, as far as possible, at  every  Mass  I
  attend.
5.   I should strive to live the Mass daily by avoiding sin  and  conforming
  my will ever more and more perfectly to God's.


                                   SUMMARY

1. Our Primary Duty.
 (a). To pay our debt of worship to God as our Creator, Conserver and  Last
 End.
 (b). By an external act which expresses our homage.
2. Sacrifice.
 (a).    An act of homage due to God alone, since it honours Him  precisely
    as Creator.
 (b).    Natural to man. Universally practised even by peoples outside  the
    Chosen Race.
 (c).    Implies
    i.   Internal dispositions, especially those of reverence and  complete
       subjection to God.
    ii.  Expressed externally by the oblation and immolation of a victim.
    iii. Performed by a priest on behalf of the community he represents.
3. The Central Sacrifice.
 (a).    The Sacrifice of Calvary.
 (b).    Why central.
 (c).    Why all perfect and infinitely pleasing to God.
4. The Last Supper.
 (a).    The double consecration of bread and wine.
 (b).    How this gives us Calvary by freeing it from the  limits  of  time
   and place.
 (c).    Christ's command: “Do this in commemoration of Me.”
5. The Mass.
 (a).    In virtue of the character given  him  at  ordination  the  priest
    today does what Christ did in the Supper Room.
 (b).    He puts Christ's death present before us in such a way that we can
    all take an active part in His Sacrifice by offering  it  with  Him  to
    God.
 (c).    By the Mass, then, we are able to give God  a  worship  worthy  of
    Him.
6. The Mass and Calvary.
 (a).    The Mass is substantially the same sacrifice as that of the Cross.


 (b).    How they are the same, and how they differ: –
       i. The efficient cause in each.
      ii. The material cause in each.
     iii. The formal cause in each.
      iv. The final cause in each.
7. Our Part in the Mass.
 (a).    The Mass is our sacrifice as well as Christ's.
 (b).    We should take a very active part in it by offering  it  in  union
    with Christ and with the priest at the altar who represents us.
 (c).    This implies an offering of ourselves to God.
 (d).    It implies too, dispositions of  subjection,  reverence  and  love
    like those that filled Christ's soul on Calvary.
 (e).    We should strive to live the Mass daily by increasing  these  good
    dispositions.
8. The Value of the Mass.
 (a) It enables us to offer to God a sacrifice of infinite worth.
 (b) It brings down God's gifts to us: –
       i. It forgives sin by the actual graces it offers.
      ii. It remits temporal punishment.
     iii. It obtains spiritual and temporal goods for us.
      iv. At Mass we can receive Holy Communion.
 (c). The Mass is the very centre of Christian worship.
 (d). How we should treasure it as our Saviour's greatest gift.
 (e). How we should live it in our daily life.
9. Practical Conclusions.

                                  EXERCISES

(A). Cross out wrong alternatives and fill in the blanks in  the  following:
–
l. Our primary duty is to worship God, since He is  our  (......),  (......)
and (......). 2. It (is) (is not) a greater crime against our nature  for  a
person to refuse to acknowledge his relationship to God than  it  is  for  a
child to refuse to acknowledge  his  relationship  to  his  parents.  3.  In
worshipping God we are exercising the virtue of (......). 4. Our worship  is
shown in adoration especially, but this implies also (......), (......)  and
(......). 5. The one act of worship that can be  offered  to  God  alone  is
called (......). 6. Sacrifice (is) (is not) natural to man. 7.  In  it,  God
is honoured  precisely  inasmuch  as  He  is  our  (......),  (......),  and
(......). 8. In it we acknowledge God's supreme (......)  over  us,  and  we
express our  entire  (......)  to  Him.  9.  These  inner  dispositions  are
expressed  externally  in  the  (......)  and  (......)  of  a  victim.  10.
Sacrifice is offered by a (......) who acts on behalf of the (......)  which
he represents. 11. The central Sacrifice was that of (......). 12.  It  gave
infinite worship to the Father, because it was offered by His only  begotten
(......) who was both (......) and (......) of His own  Sacrifice.  13.  The
sacrifices of the Old Law derived  their  efficacy  from  the  Sacrifice  of
(......). 14. Christ's acts and sufferings were of infinite  worth,  because
they were those of the (......). 15. By the double consecration at the  Last
Supper Christ freed Calvary from the limits of (......)  and  (......).  16.
At the Last Supper Christ (did) (did not) offer the first Mass. 17.  At  the
Supper He made sure that Mass would be offered everywhere to the end of  the
world by saying to His Apostles: “Do (......) in commemoration of  Me.”  18.
Christ in the Eucharist (is) (is not) distant from Himself  in  heaven.  19.
At the Mass Christ (does) (does not) come down from  heaven.  20.  A  single
consecration – that of the bread, for instance  –  (would)  (would  not)  be
enough to constitute a Mass. 21. Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross is  put  at
our disposal by means of the  (......).  22.  The  Mass  is  (substantially)
(accidentally) the same sacrifice as that of the Cross.  23.  The  efficient
cause in any sacrifice is the  (......).  24.  The  material  cause  in  any
sacrifice is the (......). 25. The formal cause  in  any  sacrifice  is  the
(......). 26. The final cause in any  sacrifice  is  the  (......).  27.  We
(should) (should not dare) offer ourselves with Christ in  every  Mass.  28.
We should strive to have in our hearts the same dispositions as  those  that
were in Christ's Heart at the (......) and on the  (......).  29.  At  every
Mass we should strive as far as possible to receive (......). 30. We  should
strive to live the Mass all day and every day  by  conforming  our  (......)
completely to God's.

(B). Answer each of the following as fully as you can: –
1.   What is our primary duty towards God? Why?
2.   Why has sacrifice been the one act of homage reserved to God?
3.   Why was Calvary the central Sacrifice?
4.   Why was Calvary a Sacrifice of infinite worth?
5.   What did Christ do at the Last Supper?
6.   What does the priest do at every Mass today?
7. Show that the Mass is our sacrifice as well as Christ's.  Point  out  how
  we can all take a very active part in it.
8. Show that the Mass is Christ's greatest gift to us. How can we  live  the
  Mass in our daily life?
