


                                 Chapter 48


                           THE LITURGY OF THE MASS


1. Vestments.


The first thing you notice when a priest comes out to offer Mass is that  he
is wearing VESTMENTS. In the early Church these corresponded to the  clothes
worn by men of high society. When  civilians  later  changed  their  way  of
dressing, the Church kept to the old style. This is why Her  vestments  look
so different from ordinary clothes today.


The outer vestment is called the CHASUBLE. This word comes  from  the  Latin
“casula,” meaning “a little house.” It is apt, because the chasuble used  to
be a cloak shaped like a bell tent with a hole at the top through which  the
wearer's head protruded. Today our chasuble is not so ample. The  sides  are
cut away to make it easier for the priest to move his arms.


On the left arm you can see a MANIPLE. This used to be a  small  towel  held
in the hand when something precious was given or received. Hence  its  name,
from “manus,” “a hand.” When not in use, it was folded over the  arm,  where
it is still worn today.


Immediately under the chasuble, there is the STOLE. It is  a  long  vestment
worn round the neck and crossed in front.  It  is  kept  in  position  by  a
girdle. Formerly, it was a handkerchief. Later, a scarf.


Under it is the ALB, a long tunic reaching to the ankles. It gets  its  name
from the Latin “alba,” which means “white.” It used to be an inner  garment.



Finally, there is the AMICE, a piece of white cloth with  which  the  priest
covers his neck and shoulders.  It  was  originally  worn  as  a  protection
against the cold, just as we wear a scarf today.


Each vestment is a symbol of a virtue. The  alb,  for  instance,  symbolises
purity; the girdle, chastity; the chasuble, Christ's yoke; and so  on.  This
is seen in the prayers attached to each.


Vestments are made in five different colours.  WHITE  signifies  purity  and
joy. Hence it is used on joyful feasts of Our Lord, on feast  of  Our  Lady,
and of saints other than martyrs. RED is the colour of fire  and  of  blood.
So it is used at Pentecost, on feasts of Our Lord that recall  the  Passion,
on the feasts of the Apostles and martyrs.  GREEN  symbolises  hope.  It  is
used therefore on Sundays after the  Epiphany  and  after  Pentecost,  since
these call to mind our pilgrimage to heaven. VIOLET reminds us  of  penance.
Hence it is used in times like  Advent  and  Lent  and  on  Ember  Days  and
Vigils. Lastly, there is BLACK, a sign of  mourning.  It  is  used  on  Good
Friday, and in Masses for the dead.


2. The Chalice.


When the priest comes from the sacristy, he has  in  his  hands  a  CHALICE.
This was originally a cup. It is made of gold or silver. If  of  silver,  it
is gilt on the inside.


On top of it there is the PATEN, a small plate on which the  host  is  laid.
It is of the same material as the chalice. On it is placed the  PALL,  which
is a stiff square piece of linen used for covering the  chalice.  Over  this
is spread the VEIL, on top of which you can see the BURSE that contains  the
CORPORAL. Like the pall, the corporal is made of linen since it  reminds  us
of the shroud that covered Our Lord's Body when it had been taken  from  the
Cross.


3. The Altar.


Arriving at the foot of the altar, the priest removes his Biretta.  He  then
genuflects to the Blessed Sacrament, or bows to the Cross  if  there  is  no
Real Presence in the tabernacle, and mounts to the top step  to  spread  out
the corporal on which the chalice is placed.


Of what does the ALTAR remind us? Of a table, like that used by Our Lord  at
the Last Supper. It reminds us also of a tomb, because  in  the  early  days
Mass was often said over the graves of martyrs in the catacombs. On it,  you
see a TABERNACLE in which  the  CIBORIUM  containing  consecrated  Hosts  is
kept. You see also a CROSS. There are CANDLES, too, in  even  numbers;  two,
four, or six. They recall to our minds the darkness of the catacombs.  There
are, however, no statues on the altar. Why not? Because  it  represents  Our
Lord. Notice, finally, that it is covered  with  three  CLOTHS,  like  those
used at the Last Supper.


At the right of the altar you can  see  a  small  table  on  which  are  two
CRUETS, one containing water, the other wine. There is also  a  little  dish
into which the priest washes his fingers, and a small towel  with  which  he
dries them.


4. Parts of The Mass.


The Mass is usually divided into two main parts. The first extends from  the
beginning to the Offertory. It  is  called  the  Mass  of  the  CATECHUMENS,
because intending converts not yet baptised were allowed to  be  present  at
it in the early Church. It is also called the  PRE-MASS  or  the  FORE-MASS,
since it is an excellent preparation for the main  part  which  follows  it.
This is called the Mass of the FAITHFUL, since  it  was  at  first  attended
only by the baptised. It can be divided into  three  parts:  the  Offertory,
the Consecration, and the Communion.


(A). THE MASS OF THE CATECHUMENS.


     (a). The Sign of the Cross.


It is most fitting that the Mass should begin with the Sign  of  the  Cross,
because this calls to our mind the mystery of the Trinity and also  that  of
the death of Christ. And in the Mass we offer this death to  the  Father  in
union with Our Lord, the Principal Priest, and thus give Him  an  adoration,
a homage, a worship of infinite worth. The early Christians  began  it  that
way, too; but they used the small Sign of the Cross made  by  the  thumb  on
the forehead, the lips and the heart – the one we use at the  Gospel  today.
Our large Sign came into use in the eleventh century.


     (b). Psalm 42.


The antiphon of this beautiful little psalm brings home to  us  the  purpose
for which we have come to church: “I will go unto  the  altar  of  God,”  it
says. It reminds us that we have come, not to daydream or  waste  our  time,
not to look at those about us, not to worry about worldly  affairs,  but  to
take a very active part in the most sacred and  most  solemn  ceremony  that
can be performed on earth; the offering of the Mass.


It first speaks of God as the Source of all blessings, especially  those  of
grace and perfect happiness, worthy therefore of infinite worship.  Then  it
brings before us our many weaknesses  and  failings,  our  lack  of  perfect
subjection to His will. It ends with an expression of  great  confidence  in
God who will have mercy on our misery, and render us worthy to offer  homage
to Him in union with His Son.


     (c). The Confiteor.


When we sin, we disobey God. Instead of conforming our will to  His,  we  do
the opposite.  Instead  of  subjecting  ourselves  to  Him,  we  rebel.  If,
therefore, we want to have the right dispositions for offering the Mass,  we
must first acknowledge our sins and then be truly sorry for  them.  This  is
why the priest next says the Confiteor, and why the  server  says  it  after
him, in the name of the whole congregation.


In saying it, we should imagine ourselves  present  at  the  Last  Judgment.
Christ is there in all His Majesty. As Judge, He is about to  pass  on  each
of us a sentence that can never change. With Him is Our  Lady  and  all  the
other saints. Acutely conscious of our sins, and of the dreadful  punishment
they have deserved, we bow our heads in shame and strike our breasts, as  we
implore our Immaculate Mother and the other  saints  to  intercede  for  us.
Then, realising that personal sin is never forgiven without  contrition,  we
make a very intense and very sincere act of sorrow  in  which  we  hate  sin
above every other evil and resolve never to commit it again.


If we could only see sin now as  we  shall  see  it  at  the  Judgment,  how
wholeheartedly we would  join  with  the  priest  when  he  says:  “May  the
Almighty and merciful Lord grant us pardon, absolution and remission of  our
sins. Amen.” And again when, mounting the altar steps, he says:  “Take  away
from us, O Lord, our iniquities, that we may be worthy to  enter  with  pure
souls into the Holy of Holies. Through Christ Our Lord. Amen.” The  Holy  of
Holies was the most sacred part of the Temple in the Old Law. Only the  High
Priest could enter it, and this only once a year. A rope was  then  fastened
to his body so that it could be dragged from the Holy of Holies  if  he  was
slain by God on account of his unworthiness. Since the altar at  which  Mass
is said is far more sacred than the Holy of Holies,  the  priest  has  every
reason to say this prayer as he approaches it to offer  this  sacrifice.  So
have we, who have to offer it with him.


Arriving at the altar, he kisses it. Why? In the first place, it  represents
Our Lord.  Secondly,  the  stone  embedded  in  it  just  in  front  of  the
tabernacle contains the relics of a saint, whose intercession  he  implores.
We, too, should here ask our favourite saints to intercede for us  that  God
may wipe away even the least stain  of  sin  from  our  soul,  and  fill  it
instead with dispositions like those that beautified Our  Lord's  Soul  when
He offered His sacrifice on the Cross.


     (d). The Introit.


The priest next goes to the missal and says the Introit. This used to  be  a
whole psalm sung while the clergy came in procession from the porch  of  the
church to the altar. Today, it is very  short;  but  it  gives  the  leading
thought in the Mass to be offered, just  as  an  overture  gives  the  right
atmosphere for a drama. In the Requiem Mass, for example,  it  begs  eternal
rest for the souls of the dead.


     (e). The Kyrie and the Christe.


“Kyrie eleison” means “Lord, have mercy  on  us,”  and  “  Christe  eleison”
means “Christ have mercy on us.” Priest and server alternate in making  this
plea. It is made nine times altogether, three  in  honour  of  each  of  the
Persons of the Trinity. The words are not Latin, but Greek, for this was  at
first the language of the liturgy, even in Rome. So they  should  remind  us
of the very early days of Christianity, and bring home to us the  miraculous
unity of the Church which goes back as the one society  to  the  times  when
the Apostles walked the earth.


Kneeling in spirit at the foot of the Cross on Calvary,  where  the  Son  of
God hangs in inexpressible agony to atone for  our  sins,  we  should  utter
this nine-fold plea for pardon with the utmost sincerity and  fervour.  This
is demanded by our very appearance at Mass, since our presence there  is  an
external manifestation of our entire subjection to God.


     (f). The Gloria.


The main dispositions that we should have in our soul at Mass are  those  of
ADORATION, THANKSGIVING, CONTRITION, which implies a  plea  for  MERCY,  and
PETITION for graces necessary for salvation. Now, these  are  all  expressed
most magnificently in the Gloria.


It fittingly begins with the angels' song at Bethlehem, because the  Son  of
God became Man to die on Calvary, so that  He  might  restore  His  Father's
honour and at the same time redeem the  world.  “Glory  be  to  God  in  the
highest,” it says, “and on earth  peace  to  men  of  good  will.”  It  then
proceeds to pay homage, first to the Father, then to the Son, and lastly  to
the Holy Ghost.


To the FATHER: “We praise Thee; we bless Thee; we  ADORE  Thee;  we  glorify
Thee. We give Thee THANKS for Thy great glory, O Lord  God,  heavenly  King,
God the Father Almighty.” To  the  SON:  “O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  only
begotten Son, O lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,  who  takest  away
the sins of the world, have MERCY on us. Who takest away  the  sins  of  the
world, RECEIVE OUR PRAYER. Who sittest at the  right  hand  of  the  Father,
have mercy on us. For Thou alone art holy, Thou alone  are  the  Lord.  Thou
alone art most exalted, O Jesus Christ.” To the HOLY GHOST:  “Together  with
the Holy Ghost in the glory of God the Father. Amen.”


How majestic this lovely prayer is! Every sentence in it is  worth  a  life-
time of meditation. Its sentiments are the most sublime that man can  utter,
for they express the right relation between the rational creature  and  God.
Put, as it has been, to heavenly music, the Gloria can fill our soul with  a
keen realisation  of  His  infinite  majesty  and  our  own  nothingness  as
creatures, and thus arouse in  us  the  dispositions  required  for  a  very
fruitful offering of the Mass.


     (g). The Collect.


In ancient  times  it  was  customary  for  the  people  to  assemble  at  a
particular church, and then go in procession to another where  Mass  was  to
be said. Before setting out, they offered a prayer in the place  where  they
had “collected”; and it was naturally called the “Collect.” This prayer  was
later said during the Mass itself, but it kept its old name, and it  has  it
still today. It is always a short prayer, but beautiful in  form,  and  full
of meaning.


Here, for instance, is the Collect for the Epiphany: “O  God,  who  on  this
day by the guidance of a star didst reveal Thine only begotten  Son  to  the
Gentiles, mercifully grant that we who  know  Thee  now  by  faith,  may  be
brought to contemplate the beauty of Thy majesty, through Jesus  Christ  Our
Lord, Thy Son, who liveth and reigneth in the unity of the Holy Ghost,  God,
forever and ever. Amen.”


You can see that it has three parts. There is  first  the  ADDRESS  to  God.
Then, the MOTIVE of the petition. Lastly, the PETITION itself. How brief  it
is! Yet how fundamental! Nothing trivial. Nothing  superfluous.  Instead,  a
humble yet manly plea for the one thing  that  matters  in  eternity  –  the
immediate vision  of  God.  And  how  great  hearted  it  is!  It  is  truly
universal, truly Catholic. It includes you and me and everyone else  capable
of going to heaven. It is as  all  embracing  as  were  Our  Saviour's  arms
outstretched upon the Cross. It is a model of  Catholic  Action.  We  should
LIVE it every day in our work and in our recreation, in our  relations  with
our fellowmen, in our sufferings and in our joys.


     (h). The Epistle and the Gospel.


So far in the Mass, we have been speaking to God. Now, He speaks to  us.  He
instructs us first in the Epistle, then in the Gospel. We should  listen  to
these with the attention and reverence due to His inspired  word.  Moreover,
they should give us a taste for Sacred  Scripture,  and  arouse  in  us  the
desire to read it every day, so that we may be able to model  our  lives  on
its infinite wisdom.


Between the Epistle and the Gospel comes the GRADUAL. This  is  followed  by
the ALLELUIA, or by the TRACT, or by the SEQUENCE.


The GRADUAL and the TRACT give the main thought contained  in  the  Epistle;
whereas the ALLELUIA, which means “Praised be God,” is a cry of joy  at  the
good news contained in the Gospel. The SEQUENCE is a  superb  poem,  put  to
excellent music. Today, there are five sequences  –  one  for  each  of  the
following Masses: Easter, Pentecost, Corpus Christi,  Our  Lady  of  Sorrow,
and the Mass for the dead. The thoughts and  sentiments  expressed  in  them
are a magnificent preparation for the main part of the Mass.


     (i). The Creed.


Next comes the Nicean Creed. It is a majestic profession  of  faith  in  the
main mysteries of Christianity. In it we submit our INTELLECT  to  God's  by
accepting His revealed truths simply and solely because He who is  Knowledge
and Truth Itself has made them known to us; and with it we submit  also  our
WILL, since this has to command the intellect's assent. This  SUBMISSION  of
our  two  highest  faculties  to  God  is  obviously  due  to  His  infinite
excellence. At the same time it is, again, an excellent preparation for  the
sacrifice we are about to offer; for this  is  so  hidden,  so  sublime,  so
utterly beyond anything we can ever experience in the  natural  order,  that
it can be known only by  supernatural  faith  which  is  a  sharing  in  the
infinite knowledge of God.


It is most fitting, therefore, that the first part of the  Mass  should  end
with the soul stirring truths preserved for us in the infallible  utterances
of the glorious Nicean Creed.


(B). THE MASS OF THE FAITHFUL.


     1. THE OFFERTORY.


At this point in the Mass it was customary for the faithful to bring to  the
altar offerings of  bread  and  wine  for  the  sacrifice.  Hence  the  name
OFFERTORY. What was not needed for the Mass was given to the priest for  his
up-keep, or distributed to the poor. A relic of this ancient custom is  seen
today at the consecration of a bishop when the one to be consecrated  offers
two loaves of bread and two small barrels of wine. It is seen, too,  in  the
collection taken up in the church when the priest begins the Offertory  part
of the Mass.


He does this by removing the veil from the chalice,  and  then  offering  to
God the host which is soon to be consecrated into the  Body  of  Christ.  At
the same time, he says a lovely prayer asking God to accept the offering  of
the Body of His Son, for the salvation of all who are present at  Mass,  and
also for all other Catholics living and dead. No one is forgotten.


He then puts wine into the chalice, and with it a few drops  of  water.  The
water represents us. The wine represents Our Lord, since it is about  to  be
turned into His Precious Blood. The union of the two  represents  the  union
that should exist between us and Christ by grace. This  is  why  the  priest
says: “O God, who in a marvellous manner  didst  create  and  ennoble  man's
being, and in a manner still more marvellous didst renew it, grant  that  by
the mystery of this water and wine we may be made partakers  of  His  Divine
Nature who hath deigned to share our human nature, Jesus  Christ,  Thy  Son,
Our Lord, who with Thee in the unity of the Holy Ghost livest  and  reignest
God forever and ever. Amen.”


As the priest puts wine  and  water  into  the  chalice,  let  us  say  this
delightful prayer with him; and let us relish every word of  it,  especially
those in which we beg to be made partakers of the  Divine  Nature  by  grace
merited for us by the death of His Incarnate Son.


Returning to the centre of the altar,  the  priest  offers  the  wine  in  a
similar way to that in which  he  offered  the  host,  and  with  a  similar
prayer.


We, too, should offer the bread and the wine in an ACTIVE manner  by  saying
the prayers said  by  the  priest;  and  with  them  we  should  also  offer
OURSELVES to God – our daily life with its joys  and  sufferings,  its  work
and recreation, so that every act of ours may be sanctified and may  acquire
a special value in His eyes  because  of  its  union  with  the  all-perfect
sacrifice offered by His Son. Thus, we shall  LIVE  the  Mass  all  day  and
every day; and others, drawn by our example, will come to know Our Lord  and
to love Him, and so save their souls.


The priest next washes the tips of his fingers at the side of the altar.  He
then turns to the people and says: “Brethren, pray  that  MY  sacrifice  and
YOURS may be acceptable to God the Father Almighty.” Inasmuch  as  the  Mass
is the offering of Christ's Sacrifice made by  Himself  to  the  Father,  it
cannot but be infinitely pleasing to Him. But it is OUR  sacrifice  as  well
as His. We must offer it with Him. And we may easily fail  to  have  in  our
soul the dispositions necessary. This is why the  priest  asks  us  to  pray
that his sacrifice and ours may be acceptable to  God.  So,  let  us  comply
with his request by saying with the server who represents us: “May the  Lord
receive the sacrifice from thy hands to the praise and glory  of  His  name,
to our benefit, and to that of all His holy Church.” This little  prayer  is
full of adoration, and, again, it omits no one. It is as  universal  as  the
Church.


The Offertory ends with the SECRET prayer. As a sample,  let  us  take  that
said on the last Sunday after Pentecost: “Grant, O Lord, our  requests,  and
while accepting the offerings and prayers of Thy people, convert all  hearts
to Thyself, that, being freed from earthly desires, we may pass to  heavenly
longings.” Again, how humble this little prayer is! Yet how  wise!  And  how
unselfish! It remembers everybody.


From what has been said you can see  that  the  Offertory  prayers  are  all
framed to fit in  perfectly  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass.  They  all
manifest our absolute dependence on God and our primary duty  of  subjecting
ourselves wholly to Him. Adoration is the dominant note throughout.


     2. THE CONSECRATION.


         (a). The Preface.


The Preface is another excellent prayer  –  this  time  one  of  praise  and
thanksgiving for all God's gifts, but especially for that of  the  Mass.  It
forms, therefore, a most fitting prelude to the Consecration.


There  are  fifteen  different  Prefaces,  but  they  have  all  a   similar
structure. There is first the opening dialogue between the  priest  and  the
server, in which the former calls on us all  to  lift  up  our  hearts  from
worldly things, and unite with him in paying homage to God.


Then the Preface proper begins. Here, for example, is that said or  sung  at
a Requiem Mass: “It  is  truly  meet  and  just,  right  and  availing  unto
salvation, that at all times and in all places we give  thanks  to  Thee,  O
holy Lord, Father Almighty, everlasting God, through  Christ  Our  Lord.  In
whom the hope of a blessed resurrection is shown to us, that  they  who  are
saddened by the certain necessity of dying may be comforted by  the  promise
of eternal life to come. For the life of Thy faithful, O  Lord,  is  changed
but not destroyed; and, when the home of this earthly life is dissolved,  an
everlasting dwelling shall be gained in  heaven.  And,  therefore  with  the
angels and archangels, the thrones and dominations, and the  whole  host  of
the heavenly army we sing the hymn of Thy  Glory,  saying  again  and  again
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of hosts. Heaven and earth are full of Thy  glory.
Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is He that cometh in the name of  the  Lord,
Hosanna in the highest.”


If you read through the Prefaces in your missal, you will see that  each  is
divided into three parts. There is first  of  all  praise  and  thanksgiving
offered to God in a general way. Then  a  particular  motive  is  mentioned.
Lastly, our praise is united to that given by the angels in heaven.  Try  to
appreciate the dignity and the rhythm of the sentences in each Preface,  and
the sublimity of the sentiments expressed. The  music  is  equally  sublime.
Here, both thought and sound combine magnificently to lift  our  hearts  and
souls to heavenly heights, and so prepare them for the Consecration  in  the
Mass.


When the priest comes to the words: “Holy, Holy, Holy  Lord  God  of  hosts”
the server rings the bell to warn the congregation that the CANON, which  is
the most important part of the Mass, is about to  begin.  “Canon”  means  “a
rule”; hence, something that does not change. It is used  of  this  part  of
the Mass, because it has remained unchanged for more  than  fifteen  hundred
years.


Our limited space will not allow us to  set  out  all  the  prayers  of  the
Canon. But, as you read them with the priest at Mass, let  them  bring  home
to you how mighty is the Church to which you are privileged to  belong.  She
is still one and the same society as that established  by  Our  Lord  nearly
two thousand years ago, and not even for an instant during that long  period
has She ceased to save souls for Him. Think, then, of the countless  members
She must have in heaven. Think, too,  of  the  hosts  in  purgatory.  Think,
finally, of the billion Catholics on earth. Try  to  realise  that  you  are
praying in  union  with  all  these,  whether  they  belong  to  the  Church
triumphant, the Church suffering, or the Church  militant;  for  by  baptism
and the public profession of your faith, you are a  visible  member  of  the
great Mystical Body of Christ.


Have, therefore, at this part of  the  Mass  especially,  a  truly  Catholic
heart, as wide as the earth,  a  heart  in  which  all  the  needs  of  your
fellowmen find an echo. Pray first for those near and dear  to  you  –  your
parents, relatives and friends. Then for those who,  after  them,  help  you
most in life – the Pope, your bishop, your  priests,  your  teachers.  Pray,
too, for all others with whom you associate in daily life –  your  next-door
neighbours, your companions at school or at work. Pray  especially  for  the
suffering, the sick, the aged and the dying. Pray,  finally,  for  all  non-
Catholics that they may share with you the happiness of the true faith.  Let
the glorious universality of the Canon prayers remind you  that  you  should
be full of zeal not only for the welfare of your own home  and  school,  but
also for that of the parish, the diocese, your country  and,  in  fact,  the
whole Catholic World.


The CANON begins with a prayer for the CHURCH and the hierarchy. Then  comes
a prayer for the LIVING,  especially  those  for  whom  the  Mass  is  being
offered, and those who are present at it. An appeal is next made to all  the
SAINTS in heaven, especially to Our Lady, the  Apostles,  and  some  of  the
early martyrs that they may intercede for us before God. This prayer  should
again bring home to us the fact that the Church today is one  with  that  of
the catacombs; and that the chief disposition required at Mass  is  that  of
complete submission to God's will – an obedience even unto death  like  that
shown by the early martyrs in imitation of Our Saviour's  obedience  on  the
Cross.


The priest next spreads his hands over the host  and  the  chalice  to  show
that we are all offering OURSELVES to God in union with the Body  and  Blood
of Christ. The server again rings the bell to warn us that the  CONSECRATION
is about to take place.


“Do this in commemoration of Me,” Our Lord said nearly  two  thousand  years
ago in a supper room in Jerusalem. And today a priest in far-away  Australia
bends reverently over a piece of bread, and does exactly  what  Christ  did.
He says “THIS IS MY BODY.” Then, bending over the chalice,  he  says:  “THIS
IS THE CHALICE OF MY BLOOD OF THE NEW AND ETERNAL TESTAMENT, THE MYSTERY  OF
FAITH, WHICH SHALL BE SHED FOR YOU  AND  FOR  MANY  UNTO  THE  REMISSION  OF
SINS.” Omnipotence that once created the universe by a  mere  command,  here
utters a mightier declaration. And this time He utters it through  the  lips
of His minister, whose priestly character enables him to  act  in  His  name
and with His power. The words therefore accomplish what  they  signify.  The
bread is changed instantly into the Body of Christ, and the  wine  into  His
Blood. As at the Last Supper, BODY AND BLOOD ARE SEPARATED SACRAMENTALLY.


This is no mere representation of Christ's death,  remember;  nor  is  it  a
sort of mystical death; nor an equivalent  of  death;  nor  a  newly-induced
state of death. It is the dread reality itself. It  is  the  very  Sacrifice
Christ underwent on Calvary, but FREED FROM THE LIMITS OF  TIME  AND  PLACE,
and made present on our altar, just as it was made present in  the  cenacle.
The Last Supper, Calvary, a Mass offered today – these are ONE in  spite  of
obvious differences, inasmuch as in all three there is the ONE SACRIFICE  of
Christ DIFFERENTLY MANIFESTED, because DIFFERENTLY SACRIFICED.


At the Supper, Our Lord offered it Himself. Today, He offers it through  the
ministry of the priest at the altar; and this priest,  remember,  represents
US. Hence we must all offer Christ's death to the Father, AS OUR  SACRIFICE,
in union with the priest and with  Christ  Himself,  who  is  the  principal
Offerer. But, to do this in a worthy manner, we must have as far as  we  can
dispositions of soul similar to those present  in  the  Soul  of  Our  Lord,
especially those of absolute subjection and obedience to the  will  of  God.
In other words, we have to offer OURSELVES together with Christ.


As we adore Our Divine Saviour at each elevation, therefore,  let  us  offer
Him to God as the Victim of Calvary, and with  Him  our  whole  self,  body,
soul and faculties, by consecrating these to God's service and love, and  to
the service and love of our fellowmen for the sake of God.


After the Consecration, the priest says five  beautiful  prayers,  including
one for the dead. We should say them with him, and with the utmost  devotion
to Our Blessed Lord who is really present before us on the altar.


Then the Canon ends with the doxology: “Through Him (i.e. Christ), and  with
Him, and in Him is to Thee, God the Father Almighty  in  the  unity  of  the
Holy Ghost, all honour and glory forever and ever. Amen.”


The Father certainly receives from His Divine Son, all the honour and  glory
due to His own infinite majesty in every Mass. But what about  each  of  us?
Does our life give unceasing glory to God? Let us examine our conscience  in
this matter, and see if there is anything else we can still do to give  more
glory to God as far as our own daily acts and sufferings are  concerned.  If
there is, let us resolve to do  it  in  order  that  everything  we  do  may
glorify the Father, THROUGH Christ, WITH Christ, and IN  Christ,  as  worthy
members of His Mystical Body on earth.


     3. THE COMMUNION.


We have offered  to  God  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  and  with  Him
ourselves. God accepts this offering of ourselves, because  it  is  made  in
union with that of His Son, which is infinitely pleasing to Him. In  return,
God now offers us something in keeping with His infinite generosity.  It  is
the gift of His beloved Son who comes to us in  Holy  Communion  to  be  the
very life of our life and the food of our souls.


To prepare our soul for His coming, we recite the OUR FATHER.  Why?  Because
its seven petitions are a perfect expression  of  the  right  relation  that
should exist between a creature  and  God.  Hence,  they  not  only  fit  in
perfectly with the spirit of the Mass as a sacrifice, but they also give  us
the right dispositions for receiving our Saviour in  the  sacrament  of  His
love. Let us say  this  God-given  prayer  with  the  utmost  sincerity  and
fervour, and with a deep sense of our total dependence on God  both  as  His
rational creatures and as His adopted children, heirs to His own  riches  in
heaven.


After the Our Father, the  priest  BREAKS  the  consecrated  Host  into  two
parts, and puts a small portion of one of them into the chalice. As he  does
so, he says: “May this mingling and hallowing of the Body and Blood  of  Our
Lord Jesus Christ help  us  who  receive  it  unto  life  everlasting.”  The
breaking of the Host obviously represents Christ's death, and  the  mingling
of part of it with the sacred Blood obviously represents the  union  of  His
Body and Blood again in the resurrection.


Then comes the AGNUS DEI. “Lamb of God, who takest  away  the  sins  of  the
world, have mercy on us,” we say twice, but the third time  we  ask  Him  to
“grant us peace.” At a High Mass  the  KISS  OF  PEACE  is  then  given.  It
signifies the charity that should reign amongst all the members of  Christ's
Mystical Body; and it reminds us that true supernatural  fraternal  love  is
necessary for a worthy reception of Communion.


Just before we go up to receive Our Lord, we say two magnificent prayers  to
Him. The first is one of complete confidence: “Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of
the living God, who by the Father's will, with the co-operation of the  Holy
Ghost, hath given life to the world through Thy own  death,  deliver  me  by
this Thy most holy Body and Blood from all my  sins  and  from  every  evil;
make me always obedient to Thy commandments,  and  never  permit  me  to  be
separated from Thee who with the same God the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost
livest and reignest, God, through all  eternity.  Amen.”  Here  we  ask  for
three mighty and most precious gifts: forgiveness of sin,  fidelity  to  the
Commandments, and final perseverance. It is one of the loveliest prayers  in
the whole Mass.


The second prayer is one of humility and holy fear  of  the  infinite:  “Let
not the partaking of Thy Body, O Lord  Jesus,  which  I,  all  unworthy,  am
about to receive, turn to my condemnation and punishment, but by  reason  of
Thy Fatherly love, may it be to my advantage as a  safeguard  of  both  soul
and body, like a well-taken remedy. Who livest and  reignest  with  God  the
Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, God, through  all  eternity.  Amen.”
This, again, is a very beautiful prayer. Conscious  of  St.  Paul's  warning
against an unworthy reception of Our Saviour in the Eucharist,  let  us  say
it with the whole-hearted devotion it deserves.


After receiving the Body and Blood of Christ, the priest gives  Him  to  the
people. He holds a Host above the ciborium and says:  “Behold  the  Lamb  of
God; behold Him who taketh away the sins of the world.”  Then  three  times:
“Lord, I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under my roof; say  but  the
word, and my soul shall be healed.” This humble and very  sincere  plea  was
uttered by the  centurion on behalf of his servant,  and  it  won  from  the
Heart of Our Saviour a miracle of kindness and love. It can do the same  for
us.


As the priest gives us Holy Communion, he says: “May the Body  of  Our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  preserve  thy  soul  unto  life   everlasting.   Amen.”   How
appropriate these words are, and how  full  of  supernatural  charity.  They
wish for us the greatest of all goods – the vision of heaven, of  which  the
worthy reception of Our Saviour in Holy Communion is already a token  and  a
pledge. “If any man eat this bread, he shall live forever.” (John 6:52).


Having given  Holy  Communion,  the  priest  returns  the  ciborium  to  the
tabernacle, and purifies the chalice and his fingers, praying  at  the  same
time that the purifying and hallowing effects of the Eucharist may  continue
after the Real Presence  has  ceased  in  our  soul;  and  that  this  great
sacrament may be for us during our pilgrimage on  earth  a  pledge  of  life
everlasting.


The Communion Verse follows, and then the  Post-communion  prayer.  This  is
not precisely a prayer of thanksgiving,  but  rather  a  petition  that  the
graces of the Eucharist may be shown forth IN OUR DAILY LIFE.  This  is  not
meant to deter us from making a very earnest thanksgiving after  Mass  while
Our Lord is still present in our soul; but it is meant  to  remind  us  that
the best way to thank Him is to strive to do well our daily work, to  fulfil
as perfectly as we can the duties of our state, to meet bravely  the  trials
and sufferings that God allows to come to us – in a word to  LIVE  THE  MASS
all day and every day, by subjecting our will in all things to His.


The Mass ends with the “Ite Missa est.” On  days  of  penance,  “Benedicamus
Domino” is said instead; and “Requiescant in pace” in Masses for  the  dead.
Then, except in Requiem Masses, the priest blesses the people, and says  the
last Gospel which is usually the superb prologue written  by  St.  John.  It
reminds us of the Incarnation of the Lord, who is the  WAY,  the  TRUTH  and
the LIFE.


If we LIVE the Mass every day by conforming our will in all things  to  His,
we, too, shall be for others a WAY  that  leads  to  heaven,  a  TRUTH  that
liberates from darkness and sin, and a source of LIFE which is nothing  less
than a sharing in the life of God.




                                   SUMMARY
1. Vestments.
 (a). i: Chasuble. ii: Maniple. iii: Stole. iv: Alb. v. Amice.
 (b). How they originated.
 (c). What they symbolise.
 (d). Colours: white, red, green, violet and black.
2. Chalice.
 (a). A cup.
 (b). Paten; Pall; Veil; Burse; Corporal.
3. Altar.
 (a). Reminds us of a table and also of a tomb.
 (b). Tabernacle; Cross, Candles; Cloths. Altar stone.
 (c). Side table with cruets, dish and finger towel.
4. Parts of the Mass.
(A). Mass of the Catechumens:
  i: Sign of the Cross. ii: Psalm  42.  iii:  Confiteor.  iv:  Introit.  v:
  Kyrie. vi: Gloria. vii: Collect. viii: Epistle and Gospel.  ix:  Gradual,
  Alleluia, Tract, Sequence. x: Creed.
(B). Mass of the Faithful:
  (a). Offertory.
  (b). Consecration.
  (c). Communion.
5. Necessity of Living The Mass All Day and Every Day.

                                  EXERCISES
(A). Fill in the blanks and cross out wrong alternatives in  the  following:
–
1. The  chasuble  was  originally  a  kind  of  (......);  the  maniple  was
(......); the stole was (......);  the  Alb  was  (......);  the  amice  was
(......). 2. The vestments are in five colours, namely: (......). 3. On  top
of the chalice you find first the (.....); then  the  (......)  ;  then  the
(......); then the (......) which contains the (....). 4. The altar  reminds
us of a (......) and of a (......). 5. Imbedded in it is the (......)  which
contains (......). 6. The safe-like structure  in  which  the  Eucharist  is
kept is called the (....). 7. The sacred  vessel  in  which  the  Hosts  are
reserved is called a  (......).  8.  The  altar  is  covered  with  (......)
cloths. 9. The candles remind  us  of  (......).  10.  The  Cross  over  the
tabernacle reminds us of (......). 11. The Mass is usually divided into  two
main parts; that of the (......) and that of the (....). 12. We  begin  Mass
with the (small) (large) Sign of the Cross. 13. In  psalm  42  we  beg  that
(......). 14. When saying the Confiteor, we should picture to ourselves  the
(......), and make a very fervent act of (......).  15.  The  priest  kisses
the altar because (......) and because (......). 16. The (......) gives  the
leading thought in the Mass to be offered. 17.  Kyrie  eleison  and  Christe
eleison mean (......) and (......) respectively. 18. The Gloria begins  with
the song of the (......). 19.  It  gives  praise  and  glory  first  to  the
(......); then to the (......); and lastly, to the (......).  20.  It  is  a
perfect expression  of  the  dispositions  we  should  have  in  offering  a
sacrifice, namely, those of (......), (......), (......)  and  (......)  21.
In the Collect, there is first the (......) to God;  then  the  (......)  of
the petition; and lastly, the (......) itself. 22. As far as the Collect  in
the Mass we speak to God; then He speaks to  us  in  the  (......)  and  the
(......). 23. The Gradual and the Tract look to the (Epistle) (Gospel);  the
Alleluia looks to the (Epistle) (Gospel). 24. There are  (......)  different
Sequences today. 25. The first part of the Mass ends with the (......).  26.
The main part of the Mass begins at the (......). 27. The union of  the  few
drops of water with the wine put into the chalice represents the union  that
should exist between us and (......) by  (......).  28.  After  washing  his
fingers the priest says: “Pray brethren, that MY sacrifice and (......)  may
be acceptable to God the Father Almighty.” 29. This  shows  that  we  should
offer (......) as well as Our Lord in the Mass. 30. The Offertory ends  with
the (......) prayer. 31. There are (......) different Prefaces. 32. Each  is
divided into three parts: in the first,  we  (......);  in  the  second,  we
(......); in the third, we (......). 33. The bell is rung at the sanctus  to
remind us that the (......) of the Mass is about to begin. 34.  The  “canon”
has remained for over (......) years. 35. At the consecration the  Body  and
Blood of Christ are separated (......). 36. His (......) is thus freed  from
the limits of time and place and made present before us  on  the  altar;  so
that we can offer to the Father is our sacrifice. 37. The “canon” ends  with
the doxology:  (......).  38.  The  Our  Father  is  said  as  an  immediate
preparation for (......). 39. As the priest  gives  us  Holy  Communion,  he
says: “May the (......) preserve thy soul unto (......).”  40.  In  all  the
prayers of the ordinary of the Mass, the word “love”  does  not  occur  even
once.  This  is  because  the  Mass  is  a  (......);  hence  the   dominant
disposition is not that  of  charity  but  that  of  (......)  by  which  we
acknowledge  God's  supreme  excellence,  His  dominion  over  us,  and  our
absolute subjection to Him as our (......) (......) and (......).

(B). Answer as fully as you can each of the following: –
1.   “Why does the priest dress like that?” a non-Catholic asks. Tell him.
2.   A non-Catholic asks you to explain the altar to him. Do so.
3.   Show the significance of the following in the first part of  the  Mass:
  the Sign of the Cross; the Psalm said at  the  foot  of  the  altar;  the
  confiteor; the introit; the Kyrie and the Christe  eleison;  the  gloria;
  the epistle and the gospel; the gradual alleluia, tract and sequence; the
  Creed.
4.   Explain all that happens at Offertory, and show  how  we  can  take  an
  active part in it.
5.   Explain what happens at the Consecration; and  show  in  what  way  the
  Last Supper, Calvary and our Mass today are one.
6.   Show from the prayers of the Mass that it is our sacrifice as  well  as
  that of Christ.
7.   “The Church devotes only a very short part of the Mass to  thanksgiving
  after Communion; hence there is no need for me to remain  after  Mass  to
  thank God for coming to me in the Eucharist.” Criticise  this;  and  show
  how we can and ought live the Mass all day and every day.
8.   What benefits do we derive from the Mass?
