


                                 Chapter 49


                               EXTREME UNCTION


1. What It Is.


At death a man realises most keenly what it is  to  be  a  PERSON,  a  SELF,
distinct from everyone and everything else. He feels utterly ALONE.  Friends
can gather round his bed. They can  pray  for  him.  They  can  offer  their
sympathy and love. But  they  cannot  prevent  his  death.  They  cannot  go
through it for him. It is he who must die. And  must  die  alone.  Moreover,
this bitter sense of being alone comes to him at a time when he  feels  most
helpless, hence most in need of  others.  Memories  of  his  many  sins  and
discouraging failures crowd in upon him. With them comes  a  terror  of  the
judgment, so near, so inevitable, so unpredictable in its  sentence,  and  –
worst of all – so final, so irrevocable. And to all this is added  so  often
the assault of Satan, making the most of his last chance  to  bring  eternal
misery to a soul.


As a loving mother, the Church has watched over the dying man  every  moment
since he was born supernaturally to Her in baptism. Can we imagine  Her  now
deserting him in his hour of greatest need? The thought  is  monstrous.  No.
She is there  in  the  person  of  Her  priest  who  represents  the  Divine
Physician by the character which ordination has  indelibly  printed  on  his
soul, and who is able consequently, as another Christ, to aid the dying  man
in a way which is truly SUPERNATURAL, hence quite beyond the  power  of  any
creature and proportionate to that of God.


He does this by administering the  sacrament  of  Extreme  Unction.  Through
this great sacrament of  God's  limitless  mercy,  the  priest  is  able  to
influence  the  soul  of  the  dying  man  directly,  and  fill  it  with  a
supernatural courage, a divine  peace,  and  a  holy  resignation  which  no
physician of this world, however eminent his skill, can ever give; and  thus
enable the recipient to meet death with  glorious  dispositions  of  victory
like those  which  Our  Divine  Saviour  summoned  it  on  the  Cross.  This
sacrament may even restore the dying  man  to  bodily  health,  warding  off
death for a time, if God sees this to be ultimately beneficial to his soul.


Extreme Unction, then, is a sacrament by which, through the  anointing  with
holy oil and the prayer of the priest, there is given to a Christian who  is
dangerously ill, health of soul and even of body, if this is  beneficial  to
the soul.





2. It Is a Sacrament.


     (a). Scripture.


In the Epistle of St. James we read: “Is any man sick  among  you?  Let  him
bring in the priests of the Church, and let them pray  over  him,  anointing
him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer  of  faith  shall  save
the sick man; and the Lord shall raise him up; and, if he be in  sins,  they
shall be forgiven him.” (James 5:14-15).


Consider first the  meaning  of  this  text.  The  word  “sick”  here  means
“seriously sick,” and “sick man” means “one in danger of death.”  (Cf.  Heb.
12:3). The use of “priests” in the plural does not mean that more  than  one
must be present to administer this sacrament. It merely indicates the  class
to which the minister must belong. Notice that the priest is to  anoint  the
dying “in the name of the Lord,” i.e. with  the  authority  and  command  of
Christ. It is a question, therefore, of an anointing instituted  by  Christ,
and having its efficacy from Him.


At the same time, the priest is to pray over the sick  man,  with  a  prayer
which is said to be “of faith,” because it is  commanded  by  faith  in  the
revelation of God. This will “save” the sick man. This word, as used by  St.
James, applies to the saving of the body as well as  of  the  soul;  but  he
uses it mainly in reference to  the  soul.  Hence,  it  means  that  Extreme
Unction will most certainly procure the spiritual welfare  of  the  one  who
receives it, if he allows it to do so; and that it may also restore  him  to
bodily health. The words “shall raise him up” mean much the  same  thing  as
“shall save.” Finally, the text assures us that, if he be  in  sins,  mortal
or venial, they shall be forgiven, provided,  of  course,  that  he  has  at
least imperfect contrition in his soul.


From what St. James says, you can see that Extreme Unction is  a  sacrament.
In the first place, it is a sensible SIGN,  made  up  of  an  anointing  and
prayer. Secondly, it is an EFFICACIOUS sign  of  GRACE,  because  it  brings
supernatural solace and strength to the dying  man,  and  forgives  whatever
sins may be on his soul. And it  does  this  by  its  very  use,  since  the
promise  is  absolute  and  fulfilled  infallibly.  Lastly,  it  is  a  sign
instituted by Christ, because it is administered in His name  and  with  His
authority. It is, obviously, an efficacious  sign  of  grace  instituted  by
Christ. In other words, a sacrament.


     (b). Tradition.


Naturally there are not as many  references  to  Extreme  Unction  in  early
tradition as there are for the other sacraments, because it is not a  public
ceremony. Moreover, it is not absolutely necessary for  salvation.  However,
there are clear references to it in writings left us by Fathers,  both  from
the East and from the West.


Men like Origen, St. Chrysostom, St. Innocent I, St.  Augustine,  St.  Cyril
of Alexandria refer to it as a sacrament. And  the  most  ancient  liturgies
show that it was administered from the beginning of the Church.


Here, for instance, is a quotation from  the  “Sacerdotal  Law”  of  Egbert,
Archbishop of York, written more than 1200  years  ago:  “According  to  the
LAWS laid down by the holy FATHERS, if anyone is sick, let him be  carefully
anointed by the priest with consecrated  oil,  along  with  prayer.”  Notice
that he speaks of the obligation to administer this sacrament as a LAW  laid
down by the FATHERS of the early Church.


What counts most for us, however, is the fact that the Council of Trent  has
defined infallibly that Extreme Unction is one of the seven sacraments  left
us by Christ. That settles the matter forever. It seals with God's  approval
our spontaneous conviction that  Our  Divine  Saviour  who  so  thoughtfully
provided a sacrament for every other great need  in  life,  must  also  have
given one for the dying, since they need His help so  sorely  at  the  dread
moment of death on which depends the eternal welfare of their souls.


3. Matter and Form.


     (a). Matter.


The REMOTE matter is OLIVE OIL, specially blessed. The PROXIMATE  matter  is
the ANOINTING. This is clear from St. James.


Oil has a natural power of soothing  pain  and  of  restoring  strength  and
vigour to the body. In Extreme Unction God  elevates  this  power  and  thus
enables it to have corresponding supernatural effects on the soul.  The  oil
used is blessed by the Bishop on Holy Thursday; and  it  is  different  from
that used in baptism and in confirmation.


Eye-lids, ears, nostrils,  lips,  hands  and  feet  are  normally  anointed,
though the anointing of the feet may be omitted for a sufficient reason.  In
case of necessity, one anointing is given on the  forehead;  and  the  short
form is used.


     (b). The Form.[1]


As the priest anoints the eyes, he says: “Through this  holy  anointing  and
His most tender mercy may God forgive  you  whatever  wrong  you  have  done
through sight. Amen.” In the  other  anointings  he  says  the  same  thing,
except, of course, that he changes the last word to suit  the  part  of  the
body he is dealing with: “hearing,” “smell,”  “taste  and  speech,”  “touch”
and “walking.” If he has to use the short form, he says: “Through this  holy
anointing, may God forgive thee whatever wrong thou hast done. Amen.”


The body of a Christian is holy, because it is a temple of the Trinity.  But
our sense faculties often lead us to commit  sin.  The  anointing  given  in
Extreme Unction is a kind of re-consecration  of  the  body  and  our  sense
faculties to God, to prepare us to appear before Him in judgement.


4. Effects.


Here are the main effects produced by this sacrament: –


     (a). It gives SANCTIFYING grace to the soul.


By giving or increasing sanctifying  grace  in  the  soul,  Extreme  Unction
beautifies it supernaturally, and thus makes it more dear  to  God.  At  the
same time it gives it a right to a greater reward in heaven.


     (b). It FORGIVES SIN.


Extreme Unction is a sacrament of  the  living.  In  other  words,  one  who
receives it should normally be in a state of grace, as  he  should  be,  for
example, when he goes to Holy Communion.  Hence,  a  person  in  mortal  sin
should ordinarily go to confession before he receives the last anointing.


If, however a sick person is incapable of going to confession  –  as  he  is
when unconscious, for instance – the  sacrament  will  forgive  even  mortal
sins, provided he has made at least  an  act  of  imperfect  contrition  for
them. This is one of the things that make Extreme Unction  such  a  precious
gift. It shows that it is indeed the  sacrament  of  God's  infinite  mercy,
since it can forgive sin in one who is no longer capable of manifesting  his
sorrow in any way, or even of performing a human act. What  more  could  God
do to save a soul that turns to Him at the end?


     (c). It removes from the Soul the REMNANTS OF SIN.


By the remnants of sin we mean the evil effects left in us by sin,  original
or personal.


These are of  three  kinds:  WEAKNESSES  in  the  SOUL  itself  and  in  its
FACULTIES, as when our will is weakened, our  intellect  darkened,  and  our
other faculties are bent in a disorderly manner towards worldly things;  BAD
HABITS in our body; and TEMPORAL PUNISHMENT due to sin.


Extreme Unction can remove all these evil consequences of sin entirely  from
the soul, if it is received with sufficiently good dispositions,  especially
if the one who receives it makes a very intense act of charity.


     (d). It brings STRENGTH and COURAGE to the Soul.


This is one of the primary effects of Extreme Unction.  It  counteracts  the
weakness, the sense of helplessness,  the  loneliness,  and  the  fear  that
normally accompany death. It brings to the soul  a  supernatural  peace  and
resignation, and with these  great  strength  to  meet  death  bravely,  and
overcome all the attacks of the devil. Non-Catholic doctors  and  nurses  in
hospitals often express their amazement  at  the  atmosphere  of  peace  and
holiness which surrounds a Catholic death-bed. They  recognise  that  it  is
something quite beyond  the  sphere  of  their  natural  art,  since  it  is
produced, not by drugs, but by a simple anointing and  a  prayer  that  have
behind them the limitless power and mercy of God.


     (e). It may restore Health of Body.


God himself assures us that this sacrament has a special power of  restoring
physical health, if He sees fit to grant this.


The restoration of health, however, is not normally  a  MIRACULOUS  one.  It
depends partly on the strength, courage and peace given  to  the  soul,  and
partly on the increased efficacy God can give to the natural agencies  which
are working for  the  recovery  of  the  sick  person.  Even  when  complete
recovery does not take place, a partial  one  may  be  granted  by  God,  to
enable the person to make a better preparation for death.


However, here as in everything else, God  acts  most  wisely.  He  does  not
grant this secondary effect of the sacrament, if it  would  be  in  any  way
against its primary effect which is the supernatural welfare  of  the  soul.
Nor can He grant it always, obviously;  for  if  He  did,  no  one  able  to
receive Extreme Unction would ever die.


So the restoring of physical health is necessarily conditional. It  depends,
first of all, as we have just said, on whether God wills  it.  Secondly,  it
depends on whether the sacrament is administered  in  good  time,  not  left
till only a miracle can save the sick person from death. Lastly, it  depends
on whether the recipient really wills to be cured, and  has  faith  in  this
particular power of  the  sacrament.  Sacraments  do  not  act  against  the
intention of the one who receives them; nor are they fruitfully received  by
unbelievers.


5. A Warning.


From what has been said, you can  see  that  Catholics  need  to  be  warned
against an unreasonable delay in calling  a  priest  to  administer  Extreme
Unction. Even good Catholics fail  in  this  matter.  They  think  that  the
coming  of  the  priest  will  frighten  the  patient.  This   is   foolish,
uncharitable and unchristian. Why?


In the first place, Extreme Unction is a sacrament for the  SICK,  not  just
for the DYING. It should be given whenever there  is  a  serious  DANGER  of
death, even though it may be much more probable that the  sick  person  will
recover. The true Catholic attitude therefore, is: “How soon may  I  receive
this precious sacrament?” not “How long may  I  safely  delay  in  receiving
it?” The graces it gives are extremely valuable; and it  keeps  giving  them
as long as the same danger remain.


Secondly, if it is to restore physical health, as it so often does, it  must
be given in good time. It is foolish  to  wait  till  the  sick  person  has
become so ill that only a miracle can save him. To delay as long as this  is
to place an obstacle to the sacrament's  power  of  restoring  health  in  a
regular way. The sacrament is not of itself ordained to miraculous  effects.



Lastly, the amount of grace it gives depends on  the  good  dispositions  in
the one who receives it. Hence, it should be given while he has  still  full
use of his faculties, especially his intellect and  will,  so  that  he  can
prepare well for it, and receive it with proper attention and  devotion.  It
is very uncharitable to delay it till he is no longer capable of  performing
a human act.


6. The Subject.2


To whom should this sacrament be given? To ADULTS, who have  been  BAPTISED,
and who are in DANGER OF DEATH from disease or old age.


Baptism is, of course, necessary, since none of the other sacraments can  be
valid without it.


Then, the person must be an adult,  because  only  an  adult  can  have  the
remnants of sin, and only an adult can need to be strengthened  against  the
attacks of the devil. Children who have not come to the  use  of  reason  in
moral matters cannot receive Extreme Unction. Nor can a person who has  been
insane since birth. What about an adult  who  is  dying  and  who  has  just
received baptism? He can and ought to be given Extreme  Unction  because  he
needs its help to fight against the devil.


Finally, the person must be in danger of death. This danger must  come  from
some INTRINSIC cause, not from an EXTRINSIC one. Thus, a healthy man who  is
about to be hanged is in imminent danger of death, if ever anyone  was,  but
this danger comes from OUTSIDE, not from INSIDE himself.  Hence,  he  cannot
receive Extreme Unction just before he goes to the gallows. A  person  about
to undergo a  serious  operation,  however,  can  and  should  receive  this
sacrament, since the danger here arises from within.  So  can  one  who  has
been seriously injured in an accident, or  wounded  in  a  battle.  Even  if
death is not likely to occur for several  months,  Extreme  Unction  can  be
given to a person afflicted with a disease which normally causes death.


If a person is certainly dead, Extreme Unction cannot be given, but  do  not
confuse APPARENT death with REAL death. A person  is  APPARENTLY  dead  when
his heart has ceased to beat, and he has ceased to  breathe.  He  is  REALLY
dead only when his soul is separated from his body, in  the  sense  that  it
ceases to give it life.


During the interval that occurs  between  REAL  death  and  APPARENT  death,
Extreme Unction may be administered. It seems very probable that a space  of
at least half an hour occurs between apparent death and real death  when  it
is a question of an ordinary malady. When death comes  suddenly,  as  in  an
accident, the interval may be longer. In cases of drowning, it may run  into
several hours. In general, it may be said that Extreme Unction may be  given
conditionally as long as the body has not become rigid, or even as  long  as
it shows no signs of putrefaction.


This sacrament can be REPEATED in a new dangerous  sickness,  or  in  a  new
danger of the same sickness.


7. Value of Extreme Unction.


Of itself, Extreme Unction is not necessary for salvation. However,  in  the
case of a person who is in mortal sin and who  has  lost  consciousness,  it
becomes a necessary means of saving his soul, since he cannot  get  his  sin
forgiven in any other way. Even when not necessary for salvation, it  should
never be neglected, since it is meant to  prepare  the  soul  for  immediate
entry  into  heaven.  It  can  do  this  if  the  person  receiving  it,  is
sufficiently well disposed.


To have the proper dispositions, a dying person should offer his life  as  a
SACRIFICE to God, in union with the offering of Christ in  the  Mass.  Dying
in union with Our Lord on the Cross and with dispositions  like  those  that
filled His Soul on Calvary – especially  those  of  obedience,  resignation,
complete subjection and love – a person may so purify his  soul  by  Extreme
Unction, that he will have no meritless sufferings to undergo in  purgatory,
but will go straight to heaven.


Extreme Unction is thus the great sacrament of final victory over death  and
over Satan. Just as baptism opens  to  us  the  gate  that  leads  into  the
supernatural life of grace in this world, Extreme Unction  can  open  to  us
the gate that leads to the beatific vision in the next.


Let us therefore prize it as it deserves; and, by a very  fervent  reception
of the other sacraments  during  life,  let  us  make  ourselves  worthy  to
receive it at  the  end,  so  that  death  may  be  for  us,  not  something
forbidding or terrifying, but a  joyful  home-going,  a  stepping  from  the
exile of this earth to our Father's home of many mansions in eternity.


                                   SUMMARY

1. What Extreme Unction Is.
 (a).    Need for a special Sacrament at death.
 (b).    Extreme Unction fulfils this. Anointing – Prayer – health of  soul
   – health of body.
2. Sacrament.
 (a). Scripture.
 (b). Tradition.
 (c). Definition of Trent.
3. Matter and Form.
 (a). Matter: Remote:  olive oil specially blessed.
         Proximate: The anointing of the senses.
 (b). Form:   Long, Short.
4. Effects.
 (a). Gives sanctifying grace.
 (b). Forgives sins.
 (c). Removes remnants of sin: weaknesses in the soul.
                       weaknesses in the body.
                       temporal punishment.
 (d). Gives strength and courage.
 (e). May restore bodily health –   If God's will.
     If given in time.
     If patient wills it and has faith in its power.
5. Warning.
 (a). Not to delay unreasonably.
 (b). Why.
6. Subject.
 (a). Baptised.
 (b). Adult.
 (c). Danger of death from some intrinsic cause.


7. Value.
 (a). For immediate entry to heaven.
 (b). Need to make ourselves worthy to receive it.
                                  EXERCISES
(A). Fill in the blanks and cross out wrong alternatives in  the  following:
–
1. At death we feel utterly alone, for each of us  is  a  (......).  2.  The
priest can help the dying by the graces given in the sacrament of  (......).
3. St. James says: “Is any man (......) among you?  Let  him  bring  in  the
(......), and let them (......) over  him,  (......)  him  in  the  name  of
(......). And the prayer of (......) shall save the sick man;  and  (......)
shall raise him up; and, if he be in (......), they shall be (......)  him.”
4. He is here speaking  of  a  sign,  since  he  mentions  an  (......)  and
(......). 5. It is a sign of grace because it  gives  supernatural  help  to
the sick, and forgives (......). 6. It is an efficacious  sign,  since  this
promise is fulfilled (......). 7. It is instituted by  Christ  since  it  is
administered in His (......) and with  His  (......).  8.  Hence,  it  is  a
(......) . 9. Anglicans can see what the Catholic Church in  England  taught
concerning  Extreme  Unction,  before  the  Reformation,  by   reading   the
Sacerdotal Law of  (......),  Archbishop  of  (......),  written  more  than
(......) years ago. 10. The remote matter of Extreme  Unction  is  (......).
11. Its proximate matter is (......). 12. The parts of  the  body  that  are
anointed are the (......). 13. The long form  is  (......).  14.  The  short
form is (......). 15. This sacrament  (does)  (does  not)  give  sanctifying
grace. 16. It forgives sin, provided the  recipient  has  (......)  for  his
sins. 17. It removes from the soul the remnants of sin, which are  (......),
(......) and (......). 18. It brings supernatural (......) and  (......)  to
the sick. 19. It (can) (cannot) make  the  soul  so  pure  that  it  can  go
straight to heaven. 20.  It  (does)  (does  not)  regularly  restore  bodily
health by a miracle. 21. It is foolish to delay too long in  having  Extreme
Unction administered because it  restores  bodily  health  if  (......),  if
(......) and if (......). 22. It is because (......), because  (......)  and
because (......). 23. A child that has not yet come to  the  use  of  reason
(may) (may not) receive Extreme Unction. 24. A soldier about to  attack  the
enemy (may) (may not) receive Extreme Unction. 25. A man who  has  swallowed
poison and is in danger of death (may) (may not)  receive  Extreme  Unction.
26. Extreme Unction may be given as long as (apparent) (real) death has  not
occurred. 27. In normal cases, real  death  does  not  occur  for  at  least
(......) after apparent death.  28.  Extreme  Unction  can  be  repeated  in
(......)  and  in  (......).  29.  The  reception  of  this  sacrament   can
(sometimes) (never) be necessary for  salvation.  30.  At  death,  a  person
should offer it as a (......) to God in union with the (......)  of  Christ,
in the (......).
(B). Answer as fully as you can each of the following: –
1.   Why do we expect Our Lord to have left a sacrament for the dying?
2.   What does Scripture tell us about Extreme Unction.
3.   Explain the matter and the form of this sacrament.
4.   What are its main effects?
5.   Why is it wrong to delay unreasonably in summoning a priest?
6.   Who may receive Extreme Unction?
7.   What is the difference between real death and apparent death?
8.   Point out the special value of Extreme Unction.
-----------------------
[1] The Form as prescribed by Paul VI in the Apostolic Constitution  on  the
Sacrament of Anointing of the Sick (30th November 1972) is, while  anointing
the forehead: “Through this Holy Anointing may the  Lord  in  His  love  and
mercy help you with the grace of the Holy Spirit,” and while  anointing  the
hands: “May the Lord who frees you from sin save  you  and  raise  you  up.”
Where there is case of an emergency the Apostolic  Constitution  notes:  “In
case of necessity, however, it is sufficient  that  a  single  anointing  be
given on the forehead or, because of the particular condition  of  the  sick
person, on another suitable part of the body, while  the  whole  sacramental
form is said.”
2 Those who can receive this sacrament as  prescribed  by  Paul  VI  in  the
Apostolic Constitution on the Sacrament  of  Anointing  of  the  Sick  (30th
November 1972): “The sacrament may be repeated if the sick  person  recovers
after being anointed and then again falls ill or if during the same  illness
the person’s condition becomes more serious.”

