


                                 Chapter 50


                                   ORDERS


1. Two Social Sacraments.


The five sacraments studied  so  far  are  for  the  sanctification  of  the
INDIVIDUAL. But Our Lord  also  left  us  two  others  for  the  welfare  of
SOCIETY. They are ORDERS and MATRIMONY. We shall speak first of Orders.


2. Orders Is a Sacrament.


At the Last Supper Our Lord consecrated bread into His Body, and  wine  into
his blood. Then He said to His Apostles: “Do THIS in commemoration  of  Me.”
Now, He could not thus command them to do what He had done, unless  He  gave
them the POWER. In other words, He could  not  command  them  to  offer  the
sacrifice of the Mass, unless he ORDAINED  them  PRIESTS.  By  these  words,
therefore, Christ established the PRIESTHOOD. Later, He gave them the  power
to forgive sins, when He said: “Whose  sins  you  shall  forgive,  they  are
forgiven. Whose sins you shall retain, they are retained.” (John 20:22).  He
thus made it certain that Mass would be offered, and sins  forgiven  by  His
priests, right to the end of the world.


Thus, the New Testament shows that the Apostles,  in  their  turn,  ordained
other PRIESTS by an external ceremony which consisted in the  imposition  of
hands and the saying of a  special  prayer  which  signified  precisely  the
nature of the power conferred. (Acts 6:6; 13:3; 14:22; 1 Tim. 4:14;  2  Tim.
2:6; etc.).


Many of the priests were later made  BISHOPS,  for  the  priestly  character
finds its ultimate complement in the Episcopate. Bishops  and  priests  were
clearly distinguished  from  the  ordinary  faithful,  by  reason  of  their
exalted office. To the bishops belonged the  office  of  ruling  the  Church
(Acts 20:28), as well as that of performing the ordinary priestly duties  of
“dispensing the mysteries of God” (1 Cor. 4:1) and  of  offering  the  Mass.
(Heb. 5:1).


Scripture makes it quite clear  that  ordination  to  the  priesthood  gives
grace. Thus St. Paul says to Timothy:  “Neglect  not  the  GRACE  which  was
given thee with IMPOSITION OF HANDS OF THE PRIESTHOOD.” (1 Tim.  4:14).  And
again: “I admonish thee that thou stir up the GRACE of God which is in  thee
by the imposition of my hands.” (2 Tim. 1:6). He also warns Timothy  not  to
confer the priesthood on others without great caution,  on  account  of  the
grave responsibilities attached to this office. “Impose  not  hands  lightly
on any man,” he says. (1 Tim. 5:22).


It is obvious, then, that the  priesthood  is  a  sacrament,  instituted  by
Christ at the Last Supper. But it is one with  several  PARTS.  Just  as  it
finds its ultimate complement in the Episcopate, so, too, it  has  below  it
certain orders which lead step by step to it.


There is first of all the Deaconate, which is mentioned in Scripture.  (Acts
6.17; 1 Tim. 3:8-13). Later, came the SUB-DEACONATE,1 and  what  are  called
the MINOR ORDERS. According to St. Thomas Aquinas, these  are  simply  parts
or sub-divisions of the Deaconate. Hence they  are  of  divine  institution,
since they are potential parts of the one sacrament of Orders.


The Council of Trent mentions seven different grades in Orders. Let us  look
briefly at each.


3. Minor and Major Orders.


The priesthood must be conferred, as St. Paul says, with caution.  A  bishop
who calls a candidate to receive ordination  must  judge  that  he  has  the
knowledge, health and virtue required. Moreover, a candidate has to learn  a
great deal of  philosophy,  theology,  Scripture,  Canon  Law,  liturgy  and
history in order to be able to do his work  well  as  a  priest.  For  these
reasons, then, he has to spend many  years  in  a  seminary,  where  he  can
practise the virtue and acquire the knowledge necessary  for  his  vocation.
During this time, he gradually approaches the priesthood. He first  receives
the MINOR orders. Then, the MAJOR.


     (A). Minor Orders.


There are FOUR of these. The lowest, hence the  first  to  be  received,  is
that of DOOR-KEEPER. It reminds us of the early persecutions when  intruders
had to be kept out of the place where Mass was said.  The  guarding  of  the
door was entrusted to an official  who  accordingly  received  an  order  to
enable him to carry out the duties of his office.


The next is that of READER. His  duty  is  that  of  reading  correctly  and
distinctly the various announcements that  need  to  be  made  at  religious
services especially at the Mass. This office reminds us of  the  times  when
comparatively few people could read.


Then comes that of EXORCIST. This, too, recalls  the  early  days  when  the
powers of darkness were particularly  violent  in  their  attacks  upon  the
infant Church. It gives the power of casting out devils.


Finally, there is that of ACOLYTE. This  empowers  a  man  to  tend  to  the
lights in church, and to hand up the wine and water used at Mass.


DOOR-KEEPER, READER, EXORCIST  and  ACOLYTE  –  these  are  the  four  Minor
Orders. Notice how they lead a candidate step  by  step  nearer  the  altar,
hence nearer the priesthood and the Mass.


     (B). Major Orders.


The first of these to be received is the SUB-DEACONATE. By it a man  becomes
a SUB-DEACON, and takes on the obligation  of  remaining  celibate,  and  of
reciting the Divine Office.


Since this two-fold obligation is a serious one,  and  since  it  binds  for
life, the Church solemnly warns candidates to consider  carefully  the  step
they are about to take in becoming sub-deacons. She says  to  them:  “Dearly
beloved children who are about to be promoted to  the  holy  order  of  sub-
deaconate, you ought to consider attentively  again  and  again  to  what  a
burden you, of your own accord, this day aspire. For, as yet you  are  free;
and it is lawful for you at will to pass over to worldly pursuits.  But,  if
you receive this order, you will no longer be  at  liberty  to  recede  from
your resolution.”


The chief duty of the sub-deacon is to assist the deacon  at  a  High  Mass.
His ordination gives him grace to carry out his duties in a  worthy  manner,
and to be a man of prayer by the reciting of the Divine Office every day.


The second Major Order is that of the DEACONATE. Before  ordaining  deacons,
the Church asks most solemnly whether the candidates are  considered  worthy
of the dignity that is about to be bestowed on them. This shows how  anxious
She is to prevent unworthy persons from entering the sanctuary as  ministers
at the altar of God.


The main duty of the deacon is that of assisting the priest  at  High  Mass.
He may also baptise, and preach.


The next order is that of the PRIESTHOOD. It is one of the most  exalted  of
all the offices that man can aspire to on earth. It  makes  him  in  a  very
true sense “another  Christ,”  since  it  enables  him  to  co-operate  most
intimately with Our Divine Saviour in  the  greatest  of  all  works  –  the
sanctification and salvation of souls.


The two main powers given by ordination  to  the  priesthood  are  those  of
consecrating  bread  and  wine  at  Mass,  and  of  forgiving  sins  in  the
confessional. To ensure  the  VALIDITY  of  these  two  mighty  powers,  the
sacrament imprints a  CHARACTER  on  the  soul  of  the  one  ordained  –  a
spiritual mark or  seal  which  endures  right  through  life  and  even  in
eternity.


What about the Episcopate? Is it an order or a sacrament DISTINCT  from  the
priesthood? Some Catholic writers say yes. Great writers, however,  such  as
St. Thomas Aquinas, St. Albert the Great and St. Bonaventure say no.  Father
Garrigou-Lagrange, one of the  greatest  of  twentieth  century  theologians
follows the latter view. He supports it by the following three arguments: –


 (a).    The Council of Trent, when mentioning Orders, does not include the
    Episcopate. It mentions only seven – the  four  Minor  Orders  and  the
    three Major Orders which are those of the Sub-deaconate, the  Deaconate
    and the Priesthood. If the Episcopate were a distinct order  from  that
    of the Priesthood, there would be eight orders, not seven.


 (b).    The Episcopate, as St. Thomas insists, does  not  give  a  special
    power over the Eucharist. But it would have to do this  if  it  were  a
    special order, because orders  are  distinguished  in  regard  to  this
    power.


 (c).    The power of consecrating the Eucharist is  far  superior  to  the
    power of ordaining priests or consecrating chalices  and  other  things
    connected with sacred ceremonies. And the power over the  NATURAL  BODY
    of Christ conferred by the priesthood is far more  excellent  than  the
    power over the MYSTICAL BODY given by the Episcopate.


True, episcopal consecration gives a bishop power to ordain priests. But  no
new character is required for this; hence,  no  new  sacrament  either,  but
only an EXTENSION of the character given by the priesthood, like that  given
it by Christ when He gave His Apostles power to forgive sins, after  He  had
ordained them priests at the Last Supper. This  enabled  the  Episcopate  to
give grace in somewhat the same way as sacramental satisfaction gives  grace
after  absolution  has  been  received.  From  this  it  follows  that   the
Episcopate is not strictly speaking an order or a  sacrament  distinct  from
the priesthood. It is simply its extension and complement.


In addition to the power which he has as a priest over the NATURAL  Body  of
Christ in the Eucharist, a bishop has  power  over  Christ's  MYSTICAL  Body
inasmuch as he can ordain other priests. But it is especially by  the  power
of JURISDICTION that the Episcopate is superior to the  priesthood.  For  it
is the principal prerogative of a bishop to RULE the faithful;  and  he  has
this power by DIVINE RIGHT.


It is also of DIVINE RIGHT that the Church be ruled by  MANY  bishops.  This
is why the Pope appoints as many bishops as he  can  throughout  the  world,
each a true ruler in his own diocese. This, too, is why the Pope desires  in
every country a NATIVE CLERGY, so that each may have  its  own  priests  and
bishops.


Finally, it is of DIVINE RIGHT that the Pope, the Vicar of Christ,  be  over
all the other bishops, not just by a primacy of honour like that enjoyed  by
the oldest priest sitting at the head of the table  at  a  clerical  dinner,
but by a primacy of rule or JURISDICTION. He has to feed the sheep  as  well
as the lambs.


A priest, then, represents Christ inasmuch as He is our REDEEMER.  A  bishop
represents Him also inasmuch as He is  our  KING,  hence  as  RULER  of  the
Church of God.


4. Matter and Form.


     (a). Deaconate.


The MATTER here is the IMPOSITION OF HANDS made by the bishop. The  FORM  is
seen in the words: “Send down on him, we beseech  Thee,  O  Lord,  the  Holy
Ghost, so that by the seven-fold gift of Thy grace, he may  be  strengthened
to carry out faithfully the work of Thy ministry.”


     (b). Priesthood.


Here the MATTER is the first IMPOSITION OF  HANDS  made  by  the  bishop  in
silence, but not its continuation in the outstretching of  the  right  hand.
The FORM is given in the words: “Bestow, we beseech Thee,  Father  Almighty,
on these Thy servants, the dignity of the priesthood. Renew in their  hearts
the Spirit of holiness, that they may receive from Thee,  O  God,  and  hold
the office of second rank, and command by the example of their own  lives  a
strict standard of morals.”


     (c). Episcopate.


Again, the MATTER is the  IMPOSITION  OF  HANDS  made  by  the  consecrating
bishop. The FORM is in the words: “Complete in Thy priest  the  fullness  of
Thy ministry; and, having clothed him with all splendour,  sanctify  him  by
the dew of heavenly anointing.”





5. The Dignity of the Priesthood.


A priest is above all else a MEDIATOR between God and  men.  He  offers  the
homage of all the faithful to God; and, in return, brings down to them  from
God His choicest graces and blessings.


From this it follows that a priesthood is excellent to the extent  to  which
the priest is united to GOD, to the VICTIM offered, and to the  PEOPLE  whom
he represents.


Now, judged on these points, the priesthood of Christ is obviously the  most
perfect possible. In the first place, He  is  a  Priest  by  reason  of  the
HYPOSTATIC UNION; and what union  with  God  could  be  greater  than  this?
Secondly, He could not be more united to the VICTIM of His sacrifice,  since
He IS this Victim. Moreover, it is a Victim whose acts  and  sufferings  are
of INFINITE worth, since they are those of the Son of  God.  Lastly,  He  is
most intimately united to the PEOPLE whom He represents,  since  He  is  the
Head of the Mystical Body, and on Calvary He offers His Sacrifice  for  ALL.
His priesthood, then is raised immeasurably above that,  say,  of  Aaron  or
that of Melchisedech. It is the most  noble,  the  most  exalted,  the  most
excellent possible to God.


From this we can get a glimpse of the dignity of  the  Catholic  priesthood,
since it is an immediate and very full SHARING in the priesthood of  Christ.



Its supreme dignity is seen, secondly, in the words uttered  by  the  priest
when he CONSECRATES the bread and the wine  at  MASS.  Over  the  bread,  he
says: “This is MY Body,” and over the wine: “This is MY  Blood.”  And  these
are changed, not into HIS body and blood, but into the Body  and  the  Blood
of CHRIST, in whose name and Person he acts.


The Priest celebrating Mass is so united  to  Christ,  INSTRUMENTALLY,  that
the same effect of consecration is produced by BOTH, just as writer and  pen
produce the same effect in the poem or essay that  is  written.  The  effect
comes WHOLLY from each. In  the  Mass,  it  comes  WHOLLY  from  Christ,  as
PRINCIPAL Offerer, and at the same time WHOLLY from the priest  who  is  His
INSTRUMENT. The effect of the consecration i.e.  the  transubstantiation  is
produced by GOD as  Principal  Agent;  by  the  HUMANITY  OF  CHRIST  as  an
instrument JOINED to the Divinity; and by the celebrant at the altar,  as  a
SEPARATED instrument, but one which, unlike the pen  in  the  hands  of  the
writer, is an intellectual agent, conscious and voluntary.


The  great  dignity  of  the  priesthood  is  manifested,  thirdly,  in  the
CONFESSIONAL. There, secrets of the heart, unknown even to the  angels,  are
made known to the priest. And, in giving absolution, he dares to say to  the
penitent: “EGO te absolvo a peccatis tuis,” “I absolve thee from thy  sins,”
because he speaks again in the name and in the very Person of  Christ.  “Who
can forgive sins but God?” the Scribes murmured  of  old  when  Our  Saviour
forgave the sins of the palsied man. And the answer  is,  as  it  was  then:
only God can forgive sins as PRINCIPAL Cause; but a Catholic priest  who  is
in a very real sense “Another Christ” by reason of the character  given  him
in ordination, can be His unworthy INSTRUMENT in annihilating sin  from  the
souls of men.


Fourthly, the dignity of the priesthood is brought home to us when we  think
that a bishop, or even the Pope himself,  has  no  greater  power  over  the
NATURAL BODY of Christ in the EUCHARIST than  has  the  simple  priest.  The
transubstantiation they effect is not more complete, not more perfect,  than
that effected by him. Their Mass is not intrinsically of  greater  value  in
the sight of God. Like theirs, his Mass gives infinite homage to God.


Lastly, the greatness of the dignity  of  the  priesthood  is  seen  in  the
SACRAMENTAL GRACES conferred by ordination.


SACRAMENTAL grace is  a  special  MODE  of  SANCTIFYING  GRACE.  It  adds  a
particular power or vigour, hence a special help, like  that,  for  example,
which Our Lady had to act as MOTHER  of  Christ,  in  the  graces  of  love,
tenderness, sweetness,  loyalty,  and  the  like  given  her  by  God.  Each
sacrament thus gives its own sacramental graces, to meet some  special  need
in life.


Thus baptism gives us grace to help us to practise  the  virtues  proper  to
Christ as a  Child  –  humility,  docility,  obedience,  piety  and  so  on.
Confirmation gives a  grace  which  enables  us  to  make  a  firm,  prudent
confession of the faith of Christ, and to imitate the virtues  He  displayed
in His public life, when He had to fight against His  enemies.  The  special
grace given by the Eucharist is one which increases  the  intensity  of  our
charity, which is a supernatural friendship with God. That given by  penance
has the special power of helping us  to  avoid  sin;  while  that  given  by
matrimony enables  the  husband  and  wife  to  live  together  in  a  truly
Christian manner, and to give their children a truly Christian education.


Now, while the CHARACTER in ordination ensures the VALIDITY of the two  main
acts of the priest – that of consecrating bread and wine at  Mass  and  that
of absolving from sin in the confessional  –  the  SACRAMENTAL  grace  given
enables him to carry out these duties and all his other duties as  well,  in
a manner worthy of a representative of  Christ,  considered  as  our  Divine
REDEEMER.


Thus it gives the priest a special habit of LOVE, which makes  him  love  to
work for the salvation of souls; a special habit of  the  APOSTOLATE,  which
urges him unceasingly to display zeal for  them;  and  a  special  habit  of
SACRIFICE, by which  he  is  ever  willing  to  sacrifice  himself  for  the
supernatural benefit of others, as Our Lord did on the Cross. In a word,  it
enables the priest to live and act and suffer as “Another Christ;” and  thus
be for all with whom he comes in contact “the good Shepherd,” “the Light  of
the world,” “the salt of the earth,” “the way, truth and life” that lead  to
heaven.


6. Conditions For Receiving the Priesthood.


Some of these are required in order that an ordination may be VALID. If  one
or more of them is missing, there is no ordination at all. The candidate  is
not a priest. Others are required in order that the ordination may be  LICIT
– that is to say, LAWFULLY received. If any one of  these  is  missing,  the
candidate commits a serious sin by receiving ordination, but the  ordination
itself is quite valid.


Here, now, are the conditions a candidate must  fulfil  in  order  that  his
ordination to the priesthood may be VALID: –

         (a). He must be BAPTISED.
         (b). He must be a MALE.
         (c). He must have the INTENTION of receiving the priesthood.

How simple they are! and how clear! They leave  no  room  whatever  for  the
least doubt concerning the validity of an ordination as  far  as  conditions
in the recipient are concerned.


The conditions demanded for the LICIT reception of the  sacrament  are  more
numerous. Here, for example, are some of them: –

         (a). A state of GRACE.
         (b). CONFIRMATION.
         (c). AGE – at least twenty-five.[1]
         (d). Sufficient KNOWLEDGE.
         (e). Sufficient VIRTUE.
         (f). ORDERS inferior to the priesthood.

There are many others as well, but most of them concern  exceptional  cases;
so there is no need to go into them here.


7. Vocation to the Priesthood.


Doubt can torment mind. It can ruin health and  happiness.  It  can  cripple
one's best efforts. It can turn earth into a sort  of  hell.  Certitude,  on
the contrary, gives a wonderful  peace  of  mind.  It  promotes  health  and
happiness. It enables us to throw ourselves completely  into  our  work.  It
makes earth a sort of foretaste of heaven.


This is why God gives us absolute certitude in matters religious.  Think  of
His INFALLIBLY taught truths, or of the EFFICACY of the  SACRAMENTS  and  of
the MASS. If the validity of the consecration depended on a  certain  degree
of sanctity in a priest, how he would worry about it! The saintlier he  was,
the more he would worry.  Similarly,  if  the  validity  of  the  sacraments
depended on his personal holiness, he would be a prey to doubt, and even  to
despair. But God has mercifully removed all these things from the realms  of
human weakness. They depend for the efficacy on  His  omnipotence,  and  the
fact that every creature must obey Him since it is wholly dependent on  him.
The bread and the wine at Mass can no more resist the  infinite  power  that
lies behind the words at consecration uttered by the priest  than  the  dead
body of Lazarus could resist Christ's command to return to life. The  effect
depends ultimately, not on man, but  on  God.  From  this  comes  the  soul-
satisfying certitude we enjoy concerning the efficacy of the  Mass  and  the
sacraments. It is the same, too, for the infallible teaching of the  Church.



Now just as it is ultimately GOD who changes  the  bread  and  the  wine  at
Mass, and who forgives sin in the sacrament  of  penance,  so,  too,  it  is
ultimately GOD who gives a man  a  VOCATION  to  the  priesthood.  Scripture
makes this quite clear. St. Paul, for example, speaking of  the  priesthood,
says: “Nor doth anyone take the honour to himself but he that is  CALLED  BY
GOD, as Aaron  was.”  (Heb.  5:4).  Or,  recall  Our  Lord's  words  to  His
Apostles: “YOU HAVE  NOT  CHOSEN  ME,  BUT  I  HAVE  CHOSEN  YOU;  and  have
appointed you that you should go and should  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that
your fruit should remain.” (John. 15:16).


How consoling this is! Once a priest realises that it is GOD who has  chosen
him and given him a certain office, he  knows  for  certain  that  God  will
always be with him in his work, and will always give him the means to  carry
it out successfully. His task is never a hopeless or an impossible one.  God
will see that it bears fruit in the way He wills. And, as Our  Lord  assures
the priest, this fruit “will remain” to be his crown and glory in  eternity.



A  vocation,  then,  is  from  GOD.  But  vocation  means  “a   call,”   “an
invitation.” To WHAT, then, does God call or invite a man when He gives  him
a vocation? He invites him to RECEIVE ORDINATION as a priest since it  is  a
question of a vocation to the priesthood. That is  obvious.  But,  HOW  does
God make this invitation known  to  the  candidate?  Before  answering  this
question, let us ask and answer a  few  others.  How  does  God  baptise  an
infant? By using as His instrument another HUMAN BEING – a priest, a  nurse,
a  doctor,  in  fact,  anyone.  How  does  He  forgive  a  sinner   in   the
confessional? Again, by using as His instrument  another  HUMAN  BEING  –  a
priest. It is the same for all the other sacraments. It is  the  same,  too,
for the consecration at Mass. God  acts  in  all  these  cases  through  the
MEDIUM of another. Now it  is  the  same  for  a  vocation.  He  makes  this
invitation known to the candidate through the BISHOP who  offers  to  ordain
him.


True, God will have given to the candidate a liking for the priesthood  long
before the bishop calls him to be ordained. This desire to be a  priest  can
exist even in young children, years before they are old enough  to  enter  a
seminary. It is sometimes called a vocation. And there is no harm  in  using
the term in this wide sense, provided we realise  that  a  vocation  in  the
proper technical sense is not something interior or hidden as  is  a  desire
to be a priest, but something perfectly EXTERNAL and  OBJECTIVE  –  a  clear
invitation made in WORDS to the candidate himself,  by  the  bishop  who  is
ready to ordain him.  This,  and  this  alone,  gives  him  a  right  to  be
ordained. By it, and it alone does God make known  FINALLY  and  INDUBITABLY
His call.


Again, how consoling this is! How horrible it would be for a  priest  if  he
could say, years after his ordination: “Perhaps I did not  have  a  vocation
after all.” He could indeed say this, if his vocation consisted formally  in
INTERIOR likings, desires or inclinations that  he  had  before  ordination.
But God kindly makes all such doubts impossible,  by  manifesting  His  Call
EXTERNALLY, in the purely OBJECTIVE invitation made on  His  behalf  by  the
bishop. If someone says to you: “Will you come to dinner with  me  tonight?”
you are absolutely certain that he is inviting you. The external senses  are
infallible. Similarly, when a bishop gives a candidate a  verbal  invitation
to accept the priesthood, he makes further doubt  impossible  regarding  the
genuineness of this call from God.


8. Conditions a Young Man Should Have Before Entering a Seminary.


Certain qualifications are required in a young man before he  can  prudently
enter a seminary. There are four of them.


     (a). A Right Intention.


He must seek ordination with a right intention – to carry  on  the  work  of
Christ on earth. Unworthy motives must be excluded – ambition, for  example,
or a life of ease and comfort, or social status, or submission to the  undue
influence of parents. Parents sin gravely who try to force their son  to  be
a priest against his will. They do a grave injury both to  him  and  to  the
Church.


     (b). Physical Fitness.


A priest needs to be physically healthy. His life is  a  strenuous  one.  He
has to give himself at all hours to the service  of  others;  no  forty-hour
week for him! He must be constantly  about  his  Father's  business.  It  is
obvious, then, that he needs to be healthy to do the work expected of him.


     (c). Intellectual Fitness.


Does this mean that a youth must be particularly clever? No.  Cleverness  is
indeed a gift; and one cannot turn it to better purpose than  to  devote  it
to God in the priesthood. But AVERAGE ability is enough. A  priest  must  be
able to explain the truths of faith to  others,  to  answer  objections,  to
solve cases of conscience  in  the  confessional,  and  to  guide  souls  to
perfection. But he gets years of training to enable him to do these  things;
and he can always keep on improving his knowledge after he is  ordained.  In
a particular case, like that of St. John Vianney, a bishop may be  satisfied
with less than average ability, on account of the exceptional sanctity of  a
candidate. But such cases do not alter the general rule.


The best type of mind is one which combines cleverness with common sense,  a
sound practical judgment, tact and prudence. It implies a certain  reverence
for  reality,  an  ability  to  see  into  the  depths  of  things,  and  to
distinguish what is fundamental from what is not, a  true  humility  coupled
with an absolute sincerity – the sort of mind developed by true  philosophy,
not the superficial type of mind fostered by a too restricted study  of  the
physical sciences, and by countless other worldly influences  that  mar  our
education so dreadfully today.


     (d). Moral Fitness.


A genuine sanctity founded on deeply rooted virtues is most necessary  in  a
priest. St. Thomas says: “By sacred orders a man is chosen for  the  highest
offices in which Christ Himself is served in the  sacrament  of  the  altar.
For this state, therefore, GREATER interior holiness is demanded  than  even
the STATE OF RELIGION requires.” In other words, a priest as  priest  should
have greater sanctity than a religious, such as a  nun  who  has  taken  the
three vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience.


Before entering a seminary, a student need not already be a  saint.  But  he
should have the well-founded hope that, with the  special  helps  given  him
there, he will be able to gain the moral fitness  required  for  ordination.
In the seminary, he will be expected to practise ALL  the  virtues,  and  to
root them ever more and more deeply in his soul.  However,  there  are  some
that belong in  a  particular  way  to  the  priesthood  –  TEMPERANCE,  for
example, with its kindred virtues of PURITY,  HUMILITY  and  OBEDIENCE.  But
above all comes CHARITY – a great love for CHRIST, the  Priest-Redeemer,  in
whose priesthood the candidate hopes some day to share;  and  a  great  love
for His MYSTICAL BODY, with which He identifies Himself on earth.  A  manly,
intense devotion to Our Lord, and a resolute will to be an apostle of  souls
for His sake, ensure a right intention in seeking orders. Hence they give  a
meaning and purpose to a student's life by lifting it to a plane far  beyond
that of any merely natural career or profession, however noble  and  exalted
it may be.


9. The Religious Life.


A man becomes a priest to sanctify OTHERS.


A person becomes a religious for his or her OWN sanctification. A  RELIGIOUS
VOCATION is a call or invitation given by God, just as  a  vocation  to  the
priesthood is. But it is given,  not  through  a  bishop,  but  through  the
SUPERIOR GENERAL of the religious order or congregation concerned.  Finally,
it is a call, not to be ordained, but to take the three VOWS.  These  remove
the chief obstacles to perfection: a sinful attachment to riches,  pleasure,
and one's own will. POVERTY removes the first;  CHASTITY,  the  second;  and
OBEDIENCE, the third. They thus  enable  a  religious  to  give  himself  or
herself wholly to God.


At times candidates for the priesthood wonder  whether  they  should  become
religious priests or secular priests. They should seek advice from  prudent,
competent persons. But above all, they should  pray  humbly,  fervently  and
confidently for light from God.


10. Home-life And Vocations.


In his magnificent Encyclical on the Priesthood, Pope Pius XI speaks of  the
great influence of home life on vocations. He writes:


  “The first and most natural place where  the  flowers  of  the  sanctuary
  should almost spontaneously grow and blossom remains always the truly and
  deeply Christian family. Most of the saintliest bishops and  priests  owe
  the beginning of their vocation and their holiness  to  the  example  and
  teaching of a father strong in faith and manly virtues,  of  a  pure  and
  devoted mother, and of a family in which the love of God  and  neighbour,
  joined with simplicity of life, has reigned supreme.


  “In an ideal home, the parents, like  Tobias  and  Sara,  beg  of  God  a
  numerous posterity; and they receive it as  a  gift  from  heaven  and  a
  precious trust. They strive to instil  into  their  children  from  their
  early years a holy fear of God, and true Christian piety. They  foster  a
  tender devotion to Jesus,  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  and  the  Immaculate
  Virgin. They teach respect and veneration for holy places and persons.


  “In such a home, the children see in their parents a model of an upright,
  industrious and pious life. They see their parents loving each  other  in
  Our Lord, see them approach the holy sacraments frequently, and not  only
  obey the laws of the Church concerning abstinence and fasting,  but  also
  observe the spirit of voluntary Christian mortification.  They  see  them
  pray at home, gathering around them all the family,  that  common  prayer
  may rise more acceptably to heaven. They find them compassionate  towards
  the sufferings of others, and see them divide with the poor the  much  or
  the little they possess.”


His Holiness goes on to say that it is hardly possible that a vocation  will
not be given to one or more of  the  children  in  such  a  home.  Then,  he
continues: –


  “Blessed are those Christian parents who are able to accept without  fear
  the vocations of their sons, and see in them a signal  honour  for  their
  family, and a mark of special love and providence  on  the  part  of  Our
  Lord. Still more blessed if, as was oftener the case in ages  of  greater
  faith, they make such divine visitations  the  object  of  their  earnest
  prayer.”


Home-life is obviously of tremendous importance in  preparing  children  for
vocations both to  the  priesthood  and  to  the  religious  life.  Parents,
therefore, should take the greatest care to see that it  is  thoroughly  and
deeply Christian, so that it may supply to Our Lord  priests  and  religious
who are willing and worthy to carry on His work on earth.


Youths interested in the priesthood should  make  a  point  of  reading  the
Encyclical mentioned above. It  gives  a  far  fuller  appreciation  of  the
greatness and the dignity of this sublime office than it has  been  possible
to give in the few pages of a short chapter such as this. And it has  behind
it the supreme authority of the Vicar of Christ.


                                   SUMMARY

1. Two Social Sacraments.
 (a). Orders.
 (b). Matrimony.
2. Orders is a Sacrament.
 (a). Institution of the Priesthood at the Last Supper.
 (b). Practice of the Apostles concerning ordination.
 (c). Teaching of the Council of Trent.
3. Minor and Major Orders.
 (a). Minor: Door-keeper; Reader; Exorcist; Acolyte.
 (b). Major: Sub-deaconate, Deaconate; Priesthood; Episcopate.
4. Matter and Form.
 (a). Matter: Imposition of hands for the Major Orders.
 (b). Form: Certain words found in the Preface.

5. Dignity of the Priesthood.
 (a).    Christ's Priesthood: the most excellent possible – Union with God,
   Victim, people.
 (b).    Dignity of Catholic Priesthood:
            i. Sharing in Christ's.
           ii. Consecration at Mass.
          iii. Absolution.
           iv. Power over the Eucharist.
            v. Sacramental Graces.
6. Conditions for Receiving the Priesthood.
 (a).    Validity: Baptised. A Male. Intention.
 (b).    Licity: Grace; confirmation; age; knowledge; virtue; reception  of
   inferior orders, etc.
7. Vocation to the Priesthood.
 (a). Invitation to receive ordination – made by God – through a bishop.
 (b). Certitude regarding it.
8. Conditions for Entering a Seminary.
 (a). Right Intention.
 (c). Physical Fitness.
 (b). Intellectual Fitness.
 (d). Moral Fitness.
9. The Religious Life.
 (a). Vows of poverty, Chastity and Obedience.
 (b). Remove obstacles to perfection.
10. Home-Life and Vocations.







                                  EXERCISES
(A). Fill in the blanks and cross out wrong alternatives in  the  following:
–
1. The two social sacraments are those of (.....) and  (......).  2.  Christ
instituted the priesthood at the (......). 3. The priestly  character  finds
its complement in the (......). 4. The Apostles not  only  ordained  priests
but also consecrated many of them (......). 5. Scripture speak  of  (......)
as well as of priests and bishops. 6. The four minor  orders  are  (......),
(......), (......), (......).  7.  The  three  major  orders  are  (......),
(......), (......). 8. A sub-deacon has to remain a (......)  for  life  and
say the (......) daily. 9. A priest represents Christ inasmuch as He is  our
(......); a bishop, inasmuch as He is  (......).  10.  It  is  a  (priest's)
(bishop's) duty to rule a diocese. 11. The matter in  the  major  orders  is
(......). 12. A priest is a (......)  between  God  and  men.  13.  Christ's
priesthood is the most excellent possible, on  account  of  His  union  with
(......), with (......) and with (......). 14. The Catholic priesthood is  a
sharing in that of (......). 15. Its dignity is also seen  in  the  (......)
at Mass, in the (......) in the Confessional, and  in  the  (......)  graces
given by ordination. 16. The three conditions required for  validity  in  an
ordination to the priesthood are  (......),  (......),  (......).  17.  Five
conditions required for licity are (......), (......),  (......),  (......),
(......). 18. A priestly vocation is an invitation to receive  (......).  It
comes from (......) through a (......). 19. Apart from a  bishop's  call  to
receive ordination, (any) (no) seminary student has a right to be  ordained.
20. Christ says to His priests: “You have not chosen Me,  but  I  (......).”
21. St. Paul says: “Nor doth anyone take the honour to himself, but he  that
is (......) as Aaron was.” 22. To go to a seminary, a  student  should  have
these four  qualifications:  (......)  (......)  (......)  (......).  23.  A
religious vocation is an invitation to take the three (......). It is  given
by (......) through a (......). 24. The vows remove the chief  obstacles  to
(......). 25. Vocations are best fostered by a truly Christian (......).

(B). Answer each of the following as fully as you can: –
1.   Why is orders a social sacrament?
2.   Explain: Minor Orders; Major Orders.
3.   In what ways is the Episcopate superior to the priesthood?
4.   Explain fully the dignity of the priesthood.
5.   Give the conditions required for a valid ordination; and a licit one.
6.   What is meant by a vocation to the priesthood?
7. What qualifications should one have on entering a seminary?
8. What influence has home-life on vocations?
-----------------------
1 [Editor’s note].  Cf.  Ministeria  Quaedam;  The  Second  Vatican  Council
changed the structure of Minor Orders: “Among the special offices which  are
to be retained and adapted to present-day needs there  are  some  which  are
essentially connected with the ministries of the word and of the  altar.  In
the Latin Church they are the office of lector, the office  of  acolyte  and
the subdiaconate. THESE OFFICES WILL NOW BE REDUCED TO TWO, THAT  OF  LECTOR
AND THAT OF ACOLYTE, AND THE FUNCTIONS OF THE SUBDIACONATE WILL  BE  DIVIDED
BETWEEN THEM……. It is in keeping with  the  nature  of  the  case  and  with
contemporary attitudes that such  ministries  should  no  longer  be  called
‘minor orders.’ Their conferring will no longer be called  ‘ORDINATION’  but
‘INSTALLATION’.”
[1] [Editor’s note]. Cf. Canon 1031.

