


                                 Chapter 51


                                  MATRIMONY


1. What It Is.


Like Orders, MATRIMONY is a SOCIAL sacrament. It is for the benefit  of  the
race. The word  comes  from  the  Latin  “Matris  Munium,”  “the  office  of
Mother.” Now, a mother's office is to  bear  and  educate  children  and  to
foster a good home life without which the proper education  of  children  is
impossible.


Sex has two main functions in human life. In  the  first  place,  it  is  an
expression of  FRIENDSHIP,  which  is  a  mutual,  unselfish  love  existing
between two persons. This noble love is  the  force  behind  all  our  self-
surrender, dedication, devotion and sacrifice. Even in the natural order  it
is a very beautiful thing. But a supernatural friendship  in  which  husband
and wife love each other in God and for God has about it  something  of  the
moral beauty of the love that exists between Christ and His Church.


The second purpose of sex is equally noble. It gives human  beings  a  share
in the creation of a soul purchased by the Blood  of  God's  Incarnate  Son,
and destined for everlasting fellowship with Him in heaven.


Now, marriage was instituted by God from the beginning to bring right  order
into the use of sex, and to keep always before us  its  noble  purposes  and
its special dignity.


For, what is marriage? It is  a  CONTRACT  –  an  AGREEMENT  freely  entered
concerning the giving and the accepting of a RIGHT. It is made  by  one  man
and one woman. And what right does each give and each accept? The  right  to
perform acts necessary for the GENERATION and  the  EDUCATION  of  CHILDREN,
and for the COMMON LIFE of the home. As a contract, of course, it  binds  in
justice.


Never forget, however, that marriage is a very special contract. Why?


First, it is concerned with  PERSONS,  not  with  mere  THINGS,  as  is  for
example a contract of buying or selling.


Secondly, even as a NATURAL contract, it contains something DIVINE.  It  was
instituted by GOD. And the BOND in it is caused, not just by the consent  of
the parties as in an ordinary contract, but  by  GOD  HIMSELF,  so  that  it
establishes between husband and wife a REAL relation of union which  depends
on Him alone. This is why it is INDISSOLUBLE by any merely HUMAN  authority,
even in the natural order.


Thirdly, marriage between BAPTISED persons is always a SACRAMENT.  Here  the
real bond of the natural contract is raised by Our Lord to be the THING  and
SIGN of a sacrament. Hence, it is sacred in a very  special  way.  It  binds
husband and wife to each other in a real relation  of  union  comparable  to
that which unites Christ and His Church.


St. Paul makes this clear when he writes: “Let women  be  subject  to  their
husbands, as to the LORD. Because the husband is head of the wife AS  CHRIST
IS HEAD OF THE CHURCH.” Again “Husbands, love  your  wives  AS  CHRIST  ALSO
LOVED THE CHURCH, and delivered Himself up for it.” (Ephes. 5:22-25).


Marriage, then, is a unique contract – especially Christian marriage,  since
it establishes between husband and wife a life-long, grace-giving union  not
unlike that which exists between Our Divine Saviour  and  the  Church.  From
this you can see how perverted modern writers are who speak  slightingly  of
marriage. They may pose before worldlings as champions of  liberty,  indeed;
but in God's eyes they are disgusting vandals, desecrators of a most  sacred
thing, enemies of the human race. They make sex a means  of  death,  whereas
in God's all-wise providence it is means of eternal life.


2. Its Causes.


The EFFICIENT cause of matrimony is the inner CONSENT freely given  by  each
party, and its external EXPRESSION in words or some equivalent sign.


The FORMAL cause is the BOND or life-long union set up between  husband  and
wife.


The MATERIAL cause is seen in the two PERSONS concerned.


The FINAL cause is the GENERATION and the  EDUCATION  of  children  and  the
benefits of HOME LIFE.


The PRIMARY END of marriage is thus the  GENERATION  and  the  EDUCATION  of
CHILDREN, who are to be raised by grace to the supernatural order, and  made
heirs, with Christ, to heaven. By DIVINE ORDINATION, then, marriage  is  for
the sake of  the  CHILDREN:  their  existence,  their  fellowship  with  Our
Saviour as members of His Mystical Body in this world, and  their  share  in
the beatific vision in eternity.


The SECONDARY end of marriage is the HOME LIFE. The  family  is  a  SOCIETY.
Hence, it must have a head. Its head  is  the  husband.  The  wife  must  be
subject to him. Her subjection, however, does not take from her the  liberty
that belongs to her as a person. Nor does it oblige  her  to  obey  requests
not in harmony with the  natural  or  the  supernatural  law,  or  with  her
dignity as a human being made in  the  image  of  God.  She  must  obey  her
husband, indeed, but as a COMPANION, not as a servant or  a  slave.  If  the
husband is the divinely-appointed head  of  the  family,  the  wife  is  its
heart. He occupies the chief place in ruling; she, the chief place in love.





3. Christ Made Marriage a Sacrament.


In the text mentioned above, St.  Paul  assures  us  that  the  union  in  a
Christian marriage is like that which exists between Christ and the  Church.
Now this is obviously an INDISSOLUBLE, GRACE-GIVING  union,  established  by
CHRIST Himself. But only a SACRAMENT could bring about such a union  between
husband and  wife.  Hence,  we  can  infer  from  Scripture  that  Christian
marriage is a sacrament.


TRADITION, too, has always held it so. From the beginning,  Christians  have
regarded marriage as something specially sacred, productive  of  grace,  and
subject, like the other sacraments, to the authority of the Church.


When, therefore, the Protestant Reformers denied this doctrine,  the  Church
infallibly declared that marriage is a sacrament. As the  divinely-appointed
guardian of Christ's revealed truths, she could not do otherwise.


The MATTER and FORM of  this  sacrament  is  the  CONSENT,  inasmuch  as  it
implies the giving and accepting of a right. The  SIGN  ONLY  is  also  this
CONSENT. The THING and SIGN is  the  BOND,  considered  as  sacred,  and  as
giving a right to actual graces all through life. It is not a CHARACTER,  as
it is in Baptism, Confirmation and Orders; but it is something like  it.  It
is an IMAGE imprinted on the soul. It likens the husband's  soul  to  Christ
in His dealings with the Church; and the wife's soul to the  Church  in  her
dealings with Christ. It thus urges the husband  all  through  life  to  act
towards his wife as Christ acts towards the Church;  and  the  wife  to  act
towards the husband as the Church acts towards her Divine  Head.  Hence,  it
guarantees for each a happy union of light and peace  and  love,  which  can
triumph over all disruptive forces, and endure till death.  The  THING  ONLY
is the SANCTIFYING GRACE given at the moment of marriage, and the  life-long
title to ACTUAL GRACES that will enable husband  and  wife  to  model  their
union ever more and more closely on that found between the Redeemer and  His
Church.


This is why an ever-growing supernatural CHARITY should always  reign  in  a
Catholic family, binding husband and wife and children to  one  another  and
to God, so that their home life may resemble that  of  the  Holy  Family  at
Nazareth, and be a sort of heaven lived and relished on earth.


Marriage, as we  have  said,  is  necessarily  a  sacrament,  provided  BOTH
parties have been baptised. If ONLY ONE of them has been baptised, there  is
no sacrament.


Who, now, are its MINISTERS? The HUSBAND and the WIFE. Each administers  the
sacrament to the other. The PRIEST must normally be present, of course;  but
he is there to see that all regulations are duly carried out, to offer  Mass
for the bride and bridegroom, and to bless their life-long union. He is  not
the minister of the sacrament.


As a sacrament, marriage comes under the authority of the  CHURCH.  However,
the STATE has a right to make regulations concerning the  CIVIL  effects  of
Christian marriage, such as wills and the distribution of property.  It  can
also legislate concerning the marriages of UNBAPTISED persons; but  it  must
respect the natural law which is a participation in the Eternal Law of God.


Few ceremonies are  more  beautiful  than  a  Catholic  marriage.  From  the
beginning, the Church has treasured this text from Scripture: “There  was  a
marriage in Cana of Galilee. And the Mother of Jesus was  there.  And  Jesus
also was invited.” (John 2:1-2). As  Our  Lady  was  welcome  at  Cana,  the
Church which is also our mother  wants  to  be  welcome  at  every  Catholic
marriage. And she wants her Divine Son to be present also. This is  why  she
links this sacrament with the Mass, which she interrupts at  a  most  solemn
moment, when Christ is present on the altar,  to  bless  the  newly-plighted
couple.


Her desire to see marriage solemnised by Holy Mass, and  the  lovers  pledge
themselves to each other in the reception of the  Eucharist  dates  back  to
very ancient times. Thus, St. Evaristus,  a  Pope  of  the  second  century,
writes: “It is a tradition coming down to us from  the  APOSTLES  themselves
that marriage should be celebrated at the time of the Holy  Sacrifice.”  And
Tertullian confesses that he is “unable to find words to express the  beauty
of a marriage that has been performed by the  Church,  strengthened  by  the
Holy Sacrifice, sealed by  the  nuptial  blessing,  proclaimed  by  heaven's
angels, and ratified by God Himself, the  Father  of  us  all.”  It  is  not
surprising, then, that the Church has never ceased to assert the  sacredness
of Christian marriage. How could She do otherwise, since it is a  sacrament,
and a symbol of the  indissoluble  union  that  exists  between  Christ  and
Herself?


4. Its Properties.


Marriage has two main properties: UNITY and INDISSOLUBILITY.


     (A). UNITY.


By the UNITY of marriage we mean that ONE man is allowed only ONE wife at  a
time; and ONE woman, only ONE husband. It is  opposed  to  POLYGAMY  and  to
POLYANDRY respectively.


POLYANDRY. Here, one WOMAN has more than one HUSBAND  at  a  time.  This  is
absolutely against the NATURAL LAW, because it  makes  the  primary  end  of
marriage impossible. It does this because  it  leads  to  sterility  in  the
wife. Moreover, it causes the children to be woefully  neglected,  since  no
man is likely to care for a child that may not be his own.  Finally,  it  is
necessarily a source of bitter jealousy and strife  which  make  the  proper
education of children quite impossible. This is why God has never  tolerated
polyandry; and why history shows that it has  been  practised  only  by  the
most degraded of people. It is completely unnatural.


POLYGAMY. Here, one MAN has more than one WIFE at a time.  This  is  not  so
unnatural as polyandry, since it does not make the primary end  of  marriage
absolutely impossible. However, it does make it DIFFICULT  to  attain.  Why?
Think a little, and you will see.


Polygamy destroys the friendship upon which  marriage  is  founded,  because
friendship can exist only between equals. Moreover, it abolishes the  equity
required, because though each wife is expected to give  herself  EXCLUSIVELY
to the husband, he cannot give himself EXCLUSIVELY to her. From this  arises
necessarily a certain amount of strife and dissension in the home; and  this
lack of peace and harmony makes the proper education of  the  children  very
difficult. For this  reason,  the  NATURAL  LAW  forbids  any  merely  HUMAN
authority to allow polygamy. God may  allow  it  in  certain  circumstances,
since He can counteract its evil effects; but man cannot.


One man, one wife is thus a ruling of nature.  And  nothing  shows  it  more
plainly  than  the  fact  that  the  birth-rate  of  males  and  females  is
everywhere almost the same. This is nature's answer to  those  who  champion
polygamy.


     (B). INDISSOLUBILITY.


By this we mean that marriage is intended to last till the death of  one  of
the parties. It forbids any merely HUMAN power to allow DIVORCE.


It is quite clear from Scripture that Our Divine Lord insisted not  only  on
the UNITY of marriage, but also on its INDISSOLUBILITY.


When, for example, the Pharisees asked Him if it was lawful, for  a  man  to
put away his wife for any cause, and then marry another,  He  reminded  them
that God made marriage indissoluble from the beginning.  He  then  gave  His
own perfectly clear command which settles  the  matter  forever.  “What  GOD
hath joined together,” He said, “let NO MAN put asunder.”  (Mark  10:9).  He
thus forbids man,  acting  on  merely  human  authority,  ever  to  legalise
divorce.


Speaking to His Apostles, He was just as clear. He  told  them  that  anyone
who puts away his wife and marries another is guilty of a heinous  sin;  and
that any woman who puts away her husband and marries another  is  guilty  of
the same sin. (Mark 10:11-12; Luke 16:8; Mat.  19:9).  St.  Paul  gives  the
same teaching. (1 Cor. 7:10; Ephes. 5:31).


TRADITION is equally  explicit  from  the  beginning.  In  the  first  three
centuries we have the testimony of authorities such as  Pastor  Hermas,  St.
Athanagoras, St. Justin, St. Theophilus, St.  Clement,  Tertullian  and  St.
Cyprian, all upholding most vigorously the indissolubility of marriage.


Even when Catholicism became the religion of the  Empire  under  Constantine
in the fourth century, the  Church  had  still  to  fight  against  divorce,
because the state laws continued to allow it. Writers such as  St.  Ambrose,
St. Augustine and St. Chrysostom had to remind  Catholics  that  there  were
divine laws as well as state laws, and that they  had  to  obey  God  rather
than men.


Then came the Dark Ages, when hordes of barbarians swept over  Europe.  Many
of them were Christians, indeed, but  they  had  learnt  their  Christianity
from Arian teachers who were lax in regard to divorce.  So  the  Church  had
still to fight against this menace.


In the centuries that followed, She continued  the  struggle,  never  giving
way for a moment even to the  demands  of  Emperors  and  kings.  Thus  Pope
Nicholas refused  divorce  to  King  Lothair  in  the  ninth  century;  Pope
Gregory, to King Robert in the tenth; Pope Urban,  to  King  Philip  in  the
eleventh; Pope Clement, to King Henry in the sixteenth,  and  Pope  Pius  to
Napoleon in the nineteenth. Fierce battles,  all  of  these,  waged  by  the
Popes against the most  influential  men  of  their  times.  They  are  most
striking witnesses to the Church's uncompromising attitude in the matter  of
divorce.


Since then, Pope after  Pope  has  had  to  defend  the  Christian  idea  of
marriage against so-called rationalists and modernists  who  have  tried  to
degrade man to the level of the beast. Not long ago, Pope Pius  XI  defended
the sacredness of marriage in  his  great  Encyclical,  Casti  Connubii,  to
preserve for us the truths entrusted him by Christ. Pope John  Paul  II  has
done similarly in our own day.[1]


In thus defending marriage, the Church is not intolerant. Nor is she narrow-
minded. She is merely enforcing the divine law laid down by Our Saviour.  At
the same time, she is applying the natural law which binds all men  inasmuch
as they are rational beings. For the NATURAL LAW forbids divorce as well  as
polygamy. Here are some reasons that show this.


    (i). Divorce is opposed to the Good of the Children.


The proper education of children demands the example and  guidance  of  BOTH
parents. The mother's education tempers what may be hard in  that  given  by
the father. The Father's supplies the virility that may be lacking  in  that
given by the mother. Each complements the other by giving  what  is  lacking
in it. And, since marriage is  for  the  sake  of  the  children  and  their
complete education, it is a serious evil to have  this  education  one-sided
or defective. Only a permanent home-life secured by the  indissolubility  of
marriage can enable children to receive  a  complete  education  from  their
earliest years. And much depends on this early education. Nothing  can  make
up for it in later life.


Moreover, a child of divorced parents cannot have an  equal  love  for  them
both. Yet, reverence and filial affection  are  the  very  foundation  of  a
child's character. Hence, such a child is woefully handicapped in life.


Finally, divorce leads to the avoidance of children,  because  the  presence
of a young family makes future unions more difficult. This  can  be  a  most
serious evil. It can quickly lead to the suicide of a nation. It shows  more
than anything else that divorce granted on merely human authority can  never
be for the good of the children, and must  therefore  be  forbidden  by  the
natural law, as well as by the revealed law of God.


    (ii). Divorce is opposed to the Good of the Husband and Wife.


When marriage is acknowledged to be indissoluble, husband and  wife  have  a
guarantee of  the  stability  required  by  a  generous  yielding  of  their
persons,  and  the  intimate   fellowship   of   their   hearts.   Moreover,
indissolubility  fosters   love   and   loyalty,   self-control,   patience,
forbearance and a spirit of forgiveness, because people who know  that  they
cannot obtain a divorce will make a special effort to make their marriage  a
success by practising these admirable virtues. At the same  time,  it  makes
married life secure from suspicion and anxiety. It shuts  the  door  against
discords arising between families and relatives.  It  does  away  with  fear
that one of the parties  may  be  unfaithful  in  later  life.  Finally,  it
protects the dignity  of  womanhood,  it  gives  every  opportunity  for  an
enduring happy union, and fidelity unto death.


Divorce, on the other hand, tends to destroy  complete  union  of  mind  and
heart, through fear of a future rift. It fosters selfishness, by removing  a
powerful motive for the practice of the virtues we have just  mentioned.  It
is likely also to destroy that prudent care in the selection  of  a  partner
which marriage demands. It may even incite to crime, when this is  the  only
way in which a divorce can be obtained. It is thus clearly  opposed  to  the
welfare of the parties.


    (iii). Divorce is opposed to the Good of the State.


The family is the fundamental unit of the state. Just as a human body is  as
healthy as its members are, so, too, a state is as healthy as  its  families
are. Once the health of family life is undermined, a state  must  totter  to
its ruin. History  affords  numerous  examples.  When  Soviet  Russia  first
relaxed the laws  concerning  marriage,  physical,  moral  and  intellectual
degradation followed. She has since applied these laws most vigorously,  for
she has been forced to admit that to flout them is to head for destruction.


Because divorce, as we have seen, promotes  discord  in  families,  ends  to
restrict the birth-rate, prevents the proper training  of  future  citizens,
belittles the practice of many virtues which  are  absolutely  necessary  to
men, and even incites to crime, it is obviously opposed to  the  welfare  of
the family. Hence also to that of the state.


We reject divorce, then, because God rejects it. So does  the  natural  law.
So does right reason. This is our answer to those who say  that  the  Church
is intolerant and narrow-minded in this all-important matter.


In exceptional  cases  where,  for  instance,  the  wife's  health  is  made
intolerable by drunkenness, neglect, or cruelty on the part of the  husband,
God allows  SEPARATION,  but  not  divorce.  Human  authority  cannot  allow
divorce here, because human authority cannot in practice  limit  divorce  to
these rare and exceptional cases. If one exception is allowed,  others  will
quickly follow, as is the case in  so  many  states  today.  The  result  is
chaos.


It is easy for writers to make a strong plea for  divorce  by  appealing  to
sentiment. But laws are rulings of REASON, not of sentiment.  And  they  are
made for the COMMON GOOD. Marriage has for its object  the  welfare  of  the
race. This determines its indissolubility, which cannot be  altered  because
of hardships to individuals. The common good demands that  they  bear  these
hardships rather than let loose on society the  race-destroying  evils  that
follow divorce. Men must obey the natural law and the divine  law,  or  they
must perish.


5. Exceptions Made By God.


While restoring marriage to its primitive unity and indissolubility,  Christ
made certain exceptions. Let us consider them.


                 (A). MARRIAGE BETWEEN TWO BAPTISED PERSONS.


 (i).     When  VALID  and  CONSUMMATED,  such  a  marriage  is  absolutely
   INDISSOLUBLE.


A marriage is said to be consummated when husband and  wife  have  exercised
their marriage  rights  by  proper  sexual  intercourse.  This  gives  their
marriage its full  significance  as  a  symbol  of  the  indissoluble  union
between Christ and the Church. At the  same  time,  it  places  a  proximate
cause of the generation of a child, for whose sake  the  indissolubility  of
marriage  was  principally  instituted.  Once  two  baptised  persons   have
consummated their marriage, therefore, it is NEVER dissolved. It  must  last
till the death of one of the parties.


 (ii).   When VALID, but NOT CONSUMMATED.


In  this  case  marriage  CAN  be  dissolved,  either  by  SOLEMN  RELIGIOUS
PROFESSION, or by PAPAL DISPENSATION


                (B). MARRIAGE BETWEEN TWO UNBAPTISED PERSONS.


 (i).     If  NEITHER  becomes  baptised  after   the   marriage,   it   is
   INDISSOLUBLE.


 (ii).   If ONE of them is baptised after marriage,  it  CAN  be  dissolved
   either by PAPAL DISPENSATION, or by the PAULINE PRIVILEGE.


This privilege gets its name from St. Paul, who first granted  it.  (1  Cor.
7:12-15). Here is the case. Two unbaptised are validly married.  Later,  one
of them receives baptism. Then, if the other runs away or  refuses  to  live
peacefully with the baptised, and  insults  God,  the  baptised  person  can
contract a new marriage, and  this  dissolves  the  previous  one.  This  is
reasonable, because the gaining of heaven through the exercise of  Christian
faith in this life is superior as an END to the natural  end  of  matrimony.
Heaven, after all, is man's LAST END. It  is  the  supreme  purpose  of  his
existence.


 (iii).  If BOTH parties are baptised after the marriage.


If the marriage is consummated AFTER baptism, it  is  INDISSOLUBLE.  If  not
consummated either before or after baptism, it CAN be  dissolved  either  by
SOLEMN  RELIGIOUS  PROFESSION  or  by  PAPAL  DISPENSATION.  If  consummated
BEFORE, but NOT AFTER baptism, it CAN be dissolved by PAPAL DISPENSATION.


         (C). MARRIAGE BETWEEN A BAPTISED PERSON AND AN UNBAPTISED.


Such a marriage cannot be dissolved by the Pauline  Privilege.  However,  if
NOT CONSUMMATED, it can be dissolved either by SOLEMN RELIGIOUS  PROFESSION,
or by PAPAL DISPENSATION. If CONSUMMATED,  it  can  be  dissolved  by  PAPAL
DISPENSATION.


It is obvious that the Pope will not grant such  a  dispensation  without  a
very serious reason. In granting it, he acts,  not  as  principal  cause  as
when he dispenses from Church  laws,  but  as  instrumental  or  ministerial
cause, as when he dispenses from an oath or a vow. He does  this  in  virtue
of Our Lord's words. “Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall  be  loosed
also in heaven.” (Matt. 16:19).


6. Impediments.


These are things which impede or hinder  a  person  from  entering  marriage
rightly. Some do this to such an extent that  they  make  the  marriage  not
only ILLICIT, but also INVALID. Unless a dispensation is obtained, there  is
NO marriage at all. Others leave the marriage VALID, but  make  it  ILLICIT.
In  other  words,  they  make  it  a  MORTAL  SIN,  unless   the   necessary
dispensation has been obtained. The former are called DIRIMENT  impediments;
the latter, PROHIBITIVE impediments.


There are many DIRIMENT impediments. We cannot deal with all  of  them;  but
here are some examples: –


  (a).    AGE. Males must be at least 16 years of  age;  females,  at  least
    14.[2]


  (b).     A  BOND  arising  from  a  previous  marriage.  Cf.  The  Pauline
    Privilege.[3]


  (c).    DIVERSITY OF RELIGION. One of the parties is not baptised.[4]


  (d).    HOLY ORDERS.[5]


  (e).    SOLEMN RELIGIOUS PROFESSION.[6]


  (f).    CONSANGUINITY or relationship by blood. This invalidates  marriage
    between ALL ascendants and descendants  in  the  DIRECT  line.  In  the
    COLLATERAL line, it extends to the FOURTH degree inclusively.[7]


  (g).    AFFINITY or relationship by marriage. This invalidates marriage in
    ALL degrees of the DIRECT line; and to the SECOND degree inclusively in
    the COLLATERAL line.


  (h).    SPIRITUAL RELATIONSHIP arising  from  baptism.  Eg.  Godfather  to
    goddaughter.


  (i).    ABDUCTION. This invalidates marriage between a  man  and  a  woman
    whom he has carried off or detained against her will, as long as she is
    in his power.[8]


  (j).    LEGAL ADOPTION, in countries where the civil  law  makes  this  an
    invalidating impediment.


    Here are some examples of PROHIBITIVE impediments: –


 (a).    SIMPLE VOWS such as a vow of virginity, of  perfect  chastity,  of
    not marrying, of receiving Holy Orders, or of embracing  the  religious
    state.[9]


 (b).    A MIXED MARRIAGE. This is one between a Catholic  and  a  baptised
    Non-Catholic – an Anglican, for example.


The existence of any impediment should be sufficient reason  for  abandoning
a proposed marriage. If, however, a person with  an  impediment  insists  on
being married he or she must obtain a DISPENSATION. The  Church  will  grant
it, if She can, and if there is a sufficiently grave reason. It is in  order
to discover impediments that She orders  the  publication  of  BANNS.  These
give people a chance to make known impediments that might not  otherwise  be
known. They also prevent secret unions, and enable the parents to  intervene
when necessary.


7. Conditions For Marriage.


(A). For LICITY.


 (a).    The parties must be in a state of grace.


 (b).    They must be free from any impediments.


 (c).    They must be sufficiently instructed in their religion.


 (d).    They must observe the precepts laid down by the Church for the due
    celebration of marriage.


(B).     For VALIDITY.


  (a).    The parties must be free from diriment impediments.


  (b).    They must freely consent to the marriage.


  (c).    If Catholics, they must normally  be  married  before  the  Parish
    Priest, or the Bishop, or a priest delegated by either  of  these;  and
    two witnesses.


8. Why The Church Forbids Mixed Marriages.


Concerning Mixed Marriages, Pope Pius XI says: “One may  find  the  Church's
attitude to Mixed Marriages stated in more than  a  few  of  Her  documents.
These are summarised as follows in Her Code of  Canon  Law:  EVERYWHERE  and
with the GREATEST  STRICTNESS  does  the  Church  FORBID  marriages  between
baptised persons one of whom is a Catholic and  the  other  a  member  of  a
schismatical or heretical sect. If it  should  also  happen  that  there  is
DANGER that the Catholic party will LOSE THE FAITH,  or  that  the  children
will be PERVERTED, then, as well  as  being  forbidden  by  Canon  Law,  the
marriage is banned by the DIVINE law.


“Circumstances are sometimes such,” he continues, “that the Church does  not
refuse to dispense in this strict prohibition. It does  so  only  where  the
marriage is not also forbidden  by  the  Divine  Law,  and  only  where  the
dangers inherent in ALL mixed marriages are  provided  against  by  suitable
safeguards. But even  when  it  does  dispense,  IT  IS  UNLIKELY  that  the
marriage will not be in some way DETRIMENTAL to the Catholic party.”


Grave words, these, coming as they do from the Vicar of Christ.


All Catholic young men and women should ponder them with the attention  they
deserve.


Here, now, are some facts which may help us to realise the  gravity  of  the
Pope's words, and to see why the Church is so opposed to Mixed Marriages.





  (a).   THERE IS A FUNDAMENTAL DIVISION BETWEEN HUSBAND AND WIFE.


Marriage should be based on complete  understanding  and  sympathy.  Husband
and wife should be one heart and one soul in all that is  DEEPEST  in  life.
But  this  is  impossible  in  a  Mixed  Marriage,  because  here  there  is
necessarily a most serious disagreement in  regard  to  something  which  is
absolutely FUNDAMENTAL, namely, RELIGION.


The Non-Catholic may be INDIFFERENT towards  religion.  Then,  things  which
the Catholic considers of the utmost importance, such as  the  existence  of
God, the Divinity of Christ, the Mass and the Sacraments,  the  Non-Catholic
will consider to be of no importance whatever. Or, the Non-Catholic  may  be
very KEEN on his or her religion. Then this party is sure to think that  the
Catholic is a prey to religious errors. To the Non-Catholic,  the  Eucharist
will be blasphemy; confession, a delusion; the Mass, a slur on Calvary;  the
veneration of Our Lady, idolatry; and so on.


In either case, it is impossible for a Catholic to be DEEPLY and  COMPLETELY
happy with such a person; for it is impossible to be ONE with him or her  in
all that really matters in life. There is a dreadful cleavage here;  and  it
is as fundamental as it is inescapable. And just because it reaches to  what
is most profound in human nature, it can stir up feelings  and  emotions  of
scorn, hatred and bitterness which can quickly wreck  the  harmony  of  even
the best-intentioned lives. It is like an atomic bomb which  needs  only  to
be released to effect its work of desolation and destruction.


  (b).   THERE IS CONSTANT DANGER OF SEPARATION OR DIVORCE.


To a Catholic, marriage is a sacrament, uniting the  parties  as  Christ  is
united to the Church. It is something most sacred, and as enduring  as  life
itself. To a Non-Catholic, however, it is usually nothing more than a  civil
ceremony, or a  religious  rite  that  has  nothing  sacramental  about  it,
dissolvable at the mere  wish  of  one  of  the  parties.  When,  therefore,
dissensions arise, as they inevitably will, the Non-Catholic  is  likely  to
seek a civil divorce, so that he  or  she  may  be  able  to  marry  another
person. The Catholic, however, cannot marry again. He or she must battle  on
through life, alone. How unfair it is! And  how  heart-rending!  Yet  it  is
what happens only too often in practice.  Catholics  should  think  of  this
when they are tempted to enter a Mixed Marriage.


  (c).   THERE IS GRAVE DANGER OF PERVERSION.


As regards the CHILDREN, Pope Pius XI does not hesitate to say:  “Experience
shows that Mixed Marriages frequently  lead  to  deplorable  defection  from
religion among the offsprings, or at least to a headlong descent  into  that
indifference which is intimately allied to impiety.”


But even ADULTS are  not  exempt  from  this  danger,  especially  when  the
Catholic party is the wife. This is particularly so, when  the  husband  has
the habit of sneering at Catholicism. “I see that the Pope has made  a  fool
of himself again.” “A bit  of  bread  is  the  Body  of  Christ  –  tell  us
another.” “Rosary beads – bit like a Buddhist's prayer wheel, aren't  they?”
“What did the priest charge you for your last confession?” Remarks  such  as
these can torment a Catholic. And, when they are kept up for  a  long  time,
the Catholic can easily give in through sheer mental strain and  worry.  The
result is loss of faith. Can such a marriage be called a happy one?


  (d).   IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR CHILDREN TO BE RIGHTLY EDUCATED.


Young children are educated almost solely by  EXAMPLE.  They  imitate  their
parents. Each child naturally thinks that his  father  and  mother  are  the
best people in the world; and that they can  do  no  wrong.  If,  then,  his
father or his mother does not go to church, or if one of them  goes  to  one
church and the other to another, a child is forced to  think  that  religion
cannot be important, or that one religion is as good as another.  The  seeds
of religious indifference are thus sown. And  they  will  develop  at  least
subconsciously, and do untold harm later on in life.


Again, when it is time to send children to school,  the  Non-Catholic  party
may easily object to pay the extra money required for a Catholic  education.
“Can't the children learn enough about their religion  from  you,  and  from
the priest on Sundays?” he will say. This, obviously, can  be  a  source  of
great worry to the Catholic. It can banish true  peace  and  happiness  from
the home. It can deprive the children of the religious atmosphere  which  is
absolutely necessary for their  proper  development  in  the  most  critical
period in their life.


  (e).   IT OFTEN CAUSES DISSENSION CONCERNING VOCATIONS.


Experience proves that when children of Mixed Marriages  want  to  go  to  a
convent or a seminary to  become  religious  or  priests,  the  Non-Catholic
party will object most vehemently. “I don't  want  any  of  my  children  to
waste their lives,” the Non-Catholic will say. The  result  is  much  bitter
suffering  for  the  children  and  for  the  Catholic  parent  –  often,  a
frustration which is life-long.


  (f).   IT OFTEN CAUSES DISSENSION CONCERNING MORAL MATTERS.


It may easily happen that the Non-Catholic will disregard  both  the  divine
and the natural law concerning the  right  use  of  marriage.  The  Catholic
cannot in conscience agree with this. Hence untold  misery  arises  for  the
Catholic, to whom no suffering can be worse than that which effects  his  or
her peace of mind before God. This is clearly one of the  worst  dangers  of
Mixed Marriages. It can turn home-life into a sort of hell.


These are, of course, only  some  of  the  reasons  why  the  Church  is  so
vigorously opposed to Mixed Marriages. You  can  easily  think  of  as  many
more. Any one of  them  should  be  sufficient  to  deter  a  Catholic  from
entering such a marriage.


They also show us why  dispensations  are  not  given  for  Mixed  Marriages
except for a just and grave reason, and only  when  the  Non-Catholic  party
gives a guarantee in writing to remove all occasions of perversion from  the
Catholic party, and both the parties agree that all the  children  shall  be
baptised and brought up as Catholics; and there is a  moral  certainty  that
these guarantees will be executed. Moreover, the Catholic party  is  obliged
in conscience to strive for the conversion of the Non-Catholic. Finally,  it
must be understood that no  religious  marriage  ceremony  will  take  place
except in the Catholic Church. These conditions apply also,  of  course,  to
the case where a Catholic receives a dispensation to marry a person  who  is
not baptised.


Non-Catholics think that we are intolerant in this matter. But, is a  lawyer
intolerant when he refuses to take into partnership a shoe-black  or  a  big
game hunter? Is a doctor intolerant when he will not take  into  partnership
a sailor or a wrestler? Obviously not. Nor is it intolerant for  a  Catholic
to  refuse  to  marry  a  Non-Catholic,  since  marriage  is   a   life-long
indissoluble partnership, and a most intimate one, upon which the  happiness
and the success of the home depends completely. While a  Catholic  may  have
excellent and most loyal friends amongst Non-Catholics,  he  should  realise
that he cannot marry a Non-Catholic without going against the  will  of  the
Church, and without running the  grave  risk  of  marring  the  success  and
happiness of his own life and that of his children.


Since the Church forbids Mixed Marriages, a Catholic is not allowed to  keep
company with a Non-Catholic with a view to matrimony. If he  finds  that  he
has been doing this, he should break off  the  company-keeping  immediately.
It is never too soon, and hardly ever too late for him to do so.  He  should
part from his  Non-Catholic  companion  both  physically  and  mentally,  by
refusing to have meetings with her and by refusing to think about  her.  And
he should interest himself in other persons and things so that  he  may  not
give way to useless broodings and self-pity. In no case will he ever  regret
the change.


Catholics should never forget that  for  them  marriage  can  be  completely
happy and successful only if they marry one of their own  faith.  Only  then
will husband and wife have for each other the  REVERENCE  due  to  a  person
made in God's image, redeemed by the death of His Son, and destined for  the
intimate sharing of His life by grace in this world and  by  the  vision  of
heaven in eternity. Only then can they LOVE  each  other  in  the  way  each
should be loved, in God and for God. Only  then  can  they  GIVE  themselves
body and soul each to the other, so as to become  one  in  mind  and  heart.
Only then can they bear with each other's faults and  failings  in  a  truly
Christian spirit, and so remain loyal to each other unto death.


9. Duties of Parents Towards Their Children.


Children belong primarily to the PARENTS, not to the  state.  Hence,  it  is
the parents' duty and right to EDUCATE their  children  in  accordance  with
the demands of the natural and divine law.  This  education  begins  in  the
home. It is carried on by the school. And, since teachers  merely  take  the
place of parents, it  is  for  the  parents  to  choose  what  school  their
children shall attend.


To educate means to train.  Now,  it  is  impossible  for  anyone  to  train
anything until he first knows the NATURE of the thing, and  the  END  to  be
achieved by the training he will give it. But man's end  is  a  SUPERNATURAL
one – the gaining of heaven. From this it follows that a complete  education
can be given only by a Catholic school, since the Catholic Church alone  has
preserved all God's revealed truths and all the means of grace He has  given
us. This is why Catholics are obliged to send  their  children  to  Catholic
schools when they can.


Education must be PROGRESSIVE and COMPLETE. Progressive, in the  sense  that
it keeps pace with the development of the child. Complete, inasmuch  as  all
the powers of  the  child,  PHYSICAL,  INTELLECTUAL,  MORAL,  EMOTIONAL  and
SOCIAL are developed as far as possible; and this not merely in the  natural
but also in the supernatural order, so that the child may grow up to  be  an
excellent citizen not only of this world but of the next.


Parents should realise that no school, however good, can make up  completely
for lack of home training. They should realise, too,  that  normally  a  big
family gives a far better education  than  a  small  one.  Why?  Because  to
provide for a large family, parents must usually exercise a  great  deal  of
virtue. They must  be  foreseeing,  industrious,  thrifty,  self-sacrificing
and, above all devoted to their home. These virtues will then  be  reflected
in their children. These will grow up in an atmosphere  of  sacrifice.  They
will learn to wait their turn, and to subordinate their whims  to  the  good
of all. They will not be pampered. The rough edges of their  character  will
be gradually worn off by the daily influence of their brothers and  sisters.
They will educate one another in a way that  an  only  child  can  never  be
educated. Their education will be progressive, and it will be complete.


10. Duties of Children Towards Their Parents.


These duties are chiefly three: LOVE, RESPECT and OBEDIENCE.


The obligation on children to love and reverence their parents  is  part  of
the general obligation on  all  human  beings  to  love  and  reverence  one
another. However, it is especially sacred  here,  because  of  the  intimate
bonds that bind children to their parents. This love and reverence  must  be
internal, of course; but it must be shown externally also by  good  manners,
cheerful conversation, a willingness to help about the house,  and  a  ready
fulfilling of their parents' wishes.


Obedience is but the counterpart of the parents' duty and right  to  educate
their children, and regulate the home. Refusal to obey is a sin; but, to  be
mortal, it must result in serious loss, material or spiritual, to parent  or
child. Moreover, this obligation has limits.


Children are never obliged to do anything sinful. And, in the  choice  of  a
state of life, though children do well  to  consult  their  parents  and  to
weigh the advice given by them, the final choice  remains  with  themselves.
Children who find obedience difficult should think  of  Nazareth  where  the
Son of God did not think it beneath His dignity to submit to His mother  and
St. Joseph. Moreover, they should remember that commands  given  by  parents
are intended to save them from injury, disease, or sin; and to  train  their
characters. It would be cruel for parents to  let  their  children  do  just
what they liked. Such children would grow up soft, selfish  and  lazy.  They
would be disliked by their companions. They would  be  a  failure  in  life.
True character training can be accomplished only at  the  cost  of  constant
self-denial and self-control. There is no  easy  road  to  success  in  this
world or in the next.


Let us end this Chapter  with  another  quotation  from  Pope  Pius  XI.  He
writes: “Marriage  has  a  sacredness  that  is  intimately  bound  up  with
religion, and with everything that is holy. It  is  SACRED  in  its  ORIGIN,
since it has God  for  its  Author,  and  has  been  from  the  beginning  a
foreshadowing of the Incarnation. It is sacred in its PURPOSE, which is  the
begetting and the education of children for God, and the binding of man  and
wife to God through Christian love and mutual support. It is sacred  in  its
very NATURE, for wedlock finds its explanation in the  farseeing  providence
of God that  made  it  the  means  of  transmitting  human  life,  and  that
constituted  the  parents  the  ministers,  as  it  were,  of   the   Divine
Omnipotence.  Add  to  this  the  further  element  of  nobleness  that  the
SACRAMENT confers on Christian marriage,  dignifying  and  elevating  it  to
such a degree that it appeared to St. Paul as a great sacrament,  honourable
in every way.”


These words contain an admirable summary of the dignity  and  importance  of
Catholic marriage. They should make all Catholics  approach  this  sacrament
with a holy reverence; and spare no pains to make their  union  all  through
life resemble as nearly as possible its perfect model  –  the  indissoluble,
grace giving union between Christ and the Church.


                                   SUMMARY

1. What Matrimony Is.
 (a).    Sex:     Expression of reverence and friendship.
         A sharing in God's creative act.
 (b).    Regulated by marriage.
 (c).    A contract:   Right given and accepted.
     Why special:      Concerns persons. Established by God.
                  A sacrament, if both parties are baptised.
2. Causes.
 (a) .   Efficient: Consent expressed externally.
 (b).    Formal: Life-long bond.
 (c).    Material: Man and woman.
 (d).    Final:   Generation and education of children.
     Benefits of the home life.
3. A Sacrament.
 (a).    Scripture. St. Paul. Union like that of Christ and the Church.
 (b).    Tradition. Early Fathers.
 (c).    Definition by Council of Trent.
 (d).    Matter and Form: the consent.
 (e).    Sign only: the consent. Thing and Sign: the bond as sacred.
 (f).    Thing only: grace given all through life.
 (g).    Ministers: the man and the woman.
 (h).    When a sacrament.
 (i).    Why administered during Mass.
4. Properties.
     (A) UNITY.
 (a).    Polyandry forbidden by the natural law. Why.
 (b).    Polygamy forbidden by the natural law. Why.
     (B) INDISSOLUBILITY.
 (a).    Christ's teaching forbidding divorce.
 (b).    The Church's life-long fight against divorce.
 (c).    The Natural Law forbids any merely human power to  grant  divorce,
    because: –
     i. It is opposed to the good of the children.
     ii. It is opposed to the good of the husband and wife.
     iii. It is opposed to the good of the state.
 (d).    Separation allowed at times.
5. Exceptions Made By God.
 (A).    Marriage between two baptised.
 (B).    Marriage between two unbaptised.
 (C).    Marriage between a baptised and a non-baptised.
6. Impediments.
 (a).    DIRIMENT. Examples.
 (b).    PROHIBITIVE. Examples.
 (c).    Dispensations.
 (d).    Banns.

7. Conditions of Marriage.
 (a).    For Licity.
 (b).    For Validity.
8. Why The Church Forbids Mixed Marriages.
 (a).    Fundamental division between husband and wife.
 (b).    Danger of separation or divorce.
 (c).    Danger of perversion.
 (d).    Impossibility of rightly educating the children.
 (e).    Dissension concerning vocations.
 (f).    Dissension concerning moral matters.
9. Duties of Parents Towards Children.
 (a).    Children belong to them, not to the state.
 (b).    Duty and right to educate them.
 (c).    Why Catholic schools are necessary.
 (d).    Need of home training. Value of a large family.
10. Duties of Children Towards Parents.
 (a).    Love, respect, obedience.
 (b).    Foundations of these.
 (c).    Example of Christ at Nazareth.
 (d).    Need of self-denial and self-control.

                                  EXERCISES
(A). Fill in the blanks and cross out wrong alternatives in  the  following:
–
1. Like Orders, Matrimony is  a  (....)  sacrament.  2.  Sex  has  two  main
functions: it is an expression of (......); and it enables husband and  wife
to co-operate with God in the creation of (......). 3. Marriage is a  (....)
since it involves the giving and accepting of a right. 4. It  is  a  special
contract, because it (........), it (........), and it  (........).  5.  Its
efficient  cause  is  (.........);  its  formal  cause  is  (........);  its
material cause is (........); and its final  cause  is  (........).  6.  Its
primary end is (........); its secondary end is (........).  7.  The  matter
and form in the  sacrament  is  found  in  (......)  8.  The  ministers  are
(.......). 9. As a sacrament, marriage comes  under  the  authority  of  the
(Church) (State). 10. The two properties of marriage are its (........)  and
(........).  11.  Its  unity  forbids  (.......)  and  (......).   12.   Its
indissolubility forbids  (........).  13.  Divorce  given  on  merely  human
authority is against the natural law, because it is opposed to the  good  of
(......),  (.......)  and  (.......).  14.  The  only  exceptions   to   the
indissolubility of marriage are those granted by  (.......)  and  taught  by
(......). 15. Marriage between two baptised, when  consummated  (may  still)
(may never) be dissolved. 16. If not consummated, such  a  marriage  may  be
dissolved either by (.......) or by  (......).  17.  Two  unbaptised  marry.
Later, one is baptised. This marriage may be dissolved either by  (........)
or by (......). 18. To marry validly, a  male  must  be  at  least  (......)
years old; a female, at least (......).  19.  Diversity  of  religion  is  a
(diriment) (prohibitive) impediment. 20.  Mixed  marriage  is  a  (diriment)
(prohibitive) impediment. 21. Relationship  by  blood  is  called  (......);
relationship by marriage is called (.......). 22. Four  conditions  required
that marriage be licit are (...... ), (.......),  (.......)  and  (.......).
23. Five reasons why the Church forbids  Mixed  Marriages  are  as  follows:
(......), (...... ), (......), (.......), (.....). 24. Catholics (are)  (are
not) allowed to go with Non-Catholics with a view to marriage.  25.  Notices
of intended marriages are called (......). 26. Children belong primarily  to
the (parents) (state). 27. Parents (are) (are not) obliged to educate  their
children  in  Catholic  schools.  28.  A  school  (can)  (cannot)  make   up
completely  for  lack  of  home  training.  29.  Children  are  obliged   to
(........), (.......) and (........) their parents.

(B) Answer each of these as fully as you can: –
1.   Show that marriage is a contract, and why it is a very special one.
2.   Show that marriage between two baptised is always a sacrament. Explain
   its matter and form; its ministers; the grace it gives.
3.   Why are polyandry and polygamy against the natural law?
4.   Explain why the Church forbids divorce.
5.   When may the following marriages be dissolved:
      (i). Marriage between two baptised.
      (ii). Marriage between two unbaptised.
      (iii). Marriage between a baptised and an unbaptised.
6.   Explain the following impediments: age; consangunity;  affinity;  mixed
   marriage; diversity of religion.
7.   Give the conditions for licity and for validity in marriage.
8.   Explain why the Church forbids Mixed Marriage.
9.   What are the duties of parents towards their children?
10.  What are the duties of children towards their parents?
-----------------------
[1] Editor’s note: Eg. Familiaris Consortio (1981)
[2] (Cf. Canon 1083).
[3] Canon 1085; “A person who is held to the bond of a prior marriage,  even
if it has not been consummated, invalidly attempts  marriage.  Even  if  the
prior marriage is invalid or dissolved for any reason whatsoever, it is  not
on that account permitted to contract another  before  the  nullity  or  the
dissolution of the  prior  marriage  has  been  legitimately  and  certainly
established.”
[4] Canon 1086.
[5] Canon 1087.
[6] Canon 1088.
[7] Canon 1091;2.
[8] Canon 1089; also Canon 1090.
[9] Canons 1087-1088.

