


                                 Chapter 52


                             DEATH AND JUDGEMENT


1. God's Warning.


“Dust thou are, and unto dust thou shalt return.” (Gen. 3:19).


“Man shall go into the house of his eternity... The  dust  shall  return  to
its earth whence it was;  and  the  spirit  return  to  God  who  gave  it.”
(Eccles. 12:5-7).


“Thou fool! This night do they require thy soul of  thee;  and  whose  shall
these things be which thou hast provided?” (Luke 12:20).


“At what hour you think not, the  Son  of  Man  will  come.”  (Luke  12:40).
“Watch ye, therefore because you know not  the  day  nor  the  hour.”  (Mat.
25:13).


“What I say to you, I say to all: Watch!” (Mark 13:37).


“It is appointed unto men once to die, and after this the judgement.”  (Heb.
9:27).


In these texts God tells us that death is inevitable; and He warns  us  most
solemnly to be always ready to die.


Man is a COMPOSITE being. He is made of a BODY  which  is  material,  and  a
SOUL which is spiritual. These are united as MATTER and FORM  to  constitute
one being, one person, one man. The matter in  the  body  is  indestructible
inasmuch as it cannot be annihilated.  The  soul,  too,  is  indestructible,
since it is spiritual. But the UNION that exists between our body  and  soul
can be destroyed. And its destruction is what we call death.  Death  is  the
dissolution of the human composite.


True, Adam was given the gift of IMMORTALITY. But he lost this  for  himself
and for us, when he sinned. Bereft of this gift, we  are  destined  to  die;
for death is natural to man inasmuch as he is an animal.


Scientists have dreamed of finding a means of prolonging life  indefinitely.
But those who did the dreaming died. No sane man today thinks  that  he  can
avoid death forever. Doctors may indeed prolong life for a  time,  but  only
for a time. God has made death a decree of His providence. “It is  APPOINTED
(i.e. decreed) unto men once to die.” And His ruling  is  final.  We  cannot
escape from it.


Hence, it is sheer madness for me to live as if I were never  to  die.  And,
since death may come to me at any minute, I should be ready for  it  always.
Every day I should say to myself: “If I were to die now, would  I  be  in  a
fit state to undergo God's judgment?” It is  supremely  wise  to  be  always
prepared. For we die  but  once,  and  death  settles  forever  our  lot  in
eternity.


2. Kinds of Death.


All who have come to the use of reason in moral matter must die either in  a
state of grace or in a state of personal mortal sin.


Death in a state of grace is  called  FINAL  PERSEVERANCE.  It  is  a  happy
death. Death in a state of personal mortal sin is called FINAL  IMPENITENCE.
It is a bad death.


Final perseverance is, in a sense, the greatest  of  all  graces,  since  it
makes heaven certain for us. It cannot be MERITED. But it can be secured  by
fervent, humble, confident, persevering prayer, by the intercession  of  Our
Lady, and by having Masses said for it.


Final impenitence, on the contrary, is the greatest evil that  can  come  to
man, since it carries with it the everlasting miseries of hell.  It  is  one
thing for which we ought to have a reasonable and wholesome  dread.  And  we
should never forget that a person prepares the way for  it  by  putting  off
his conversion from a life of sin. It is a terrifyingly stupid thing  for  a
person to live habitually in mortal sin, because this  constant  refusal  to
make use of God's grace blinds the soul ever more and more to the  necessity
of returning to grace. Hence, it removes from the sinner the very  means  of
repentance, and makes  his  conversion  constantly  more  difficult.  Sacred
Scripture has many dreadful texts concerning  those  who  are  obstinate  in
sin.


However, deathbed conversions do take place, even with those who, as far  as
we can judge, have been great sinners. Here are a few instances  taken  from
history.


St. John Vianney once gave  unutterable  consolation  to  a  woman  worrying
about the salvation  of  her  husband,  who  had  committed  suicide.  “Your
husband is saved,” the saint said to her, though she  had  not  as  much  as
mentioned the cause of her sorrow. “When he threw himself  into  the  Rhone,
the Blessed Virgin obtained for him the grace of conversion just  before  he
died. Recall how, a month ago in your garden, he  picked  a  most  beautiful
rose and said to you: 'Take this to the altar of the  Blessed  Virgin.'  She
did not forget.”


St. Catherine of Sienna once saw two criminals  being  taken  to  execution.
Both  were  blaspheming  God.  She  offered  a  fervent  prayer  for   their
salvation. They immediately ceased to blaspheme. Instead, they asked  for  a
priest, and in a very fervent confession each made his peace with God. In  a
similar way, St. Theresa of Lisieux  gained  the  salvation  of  a  hardened
criminal who repented at death.


A few years ago a chaplain to  a  prison  in  Nancy  had  a  reputation  for
converting all whom he accompanied  to  the  guillotine.  On  one  occasion,
however, he seemed to be failing.  The  man  he  was  with  defied  all  his
pleading. On the way to the place  of  execution,  they  passed  before  the
church of Our Lady of Refuge.  This  reminded  the  priest  of  that  lovely
prayer, the Memorare. So he said to Our Lady:  “Remember,  O  most  gracious
Virgin, that it was never known that anyone who sought thy intercession  was
left unaided. Convert this criminal. Otherwise, I will say that it has  been
known that you have  not  heard.”  She  did  hear.  The  man  repented  most
fervently a few minutes before death sent him to judgment.


St. John Bosco once attended the deathbed of a Catholic  who  had  become  a
Mason. The dying man had a revolver under  his  pillow,  so  that  he  might
commit suicide if his pain became intolerable. He  told  Bosco  about  this,
and then threatened to shoot the  saint  first  and  then  himself,  if  the
former talked about religion. So the conversation was  about  other  things.
Finally, however, it drifted on to Voltaire. “Some say that  Voltaire  never
repented, and had a bad death,” said Bosco, “but I do not say that,  because
I do not know.”


“You mean,” said the dying man, “that even Voltaire could repent?”


“Of course.”


“Then I, too, can repent.” And this man who had despaired of  salvation  met
death, not by adding a final sin of suicide to  his  already  long  list  of
sins, but by  receiving  the  last  sacraments  which  changed  his  eternal
destiny from hell to heaven.


Examples such as these could be multiplied.  They  show  how  sincerely  God
wills the salvation of all. “I desire not  the  death  of  the  wicked,”  he
says, “but that the wicked turn from his way,  and  live.”  (Ezach.  33:11).
All the same, it remains true to say that it is extreme folly for  a  sinner
to keep putting off his conversion. By doing this, he is  preparing  himself
for a bad death, and thus taking a frightful  risk  in  regard  to  the  one
thing that really matters – the eternal welfare of his soul.


3. Effects of Death.


     (a). It strips from us all worldly goods forever.


Since death takes from us all worldly goods, it is very foolish  for  us  to
set our hearts on these in such a way as to separate ourselves from God  who
gives them to us. It is a horrible distortion to will them in preference  to
Him, since He is infinitely better than they. To seek complete happiness  in
creatures is to seek something which they can never give. Only the  Infinite
can satisfy fully and for ever the limitless craving of  our  intellect  for
truth, and the limitless craving of our will for goodness. In God alone  can
we find perfect happiness.


Never should we forget that temporal goods are not our LAST  END,  but  only
MEANS to unite us ever more and more closely to God.  We  should  use  them,
therefore, in such a way that they increase daily our union with  Him.  Thus
treasured and respected as His  good  gifts  to  us,  they  will  remind  us
constantly of Him, and bring us ever nearer to Him,  till  death  makes  our
union with Him eternally permanent in the peace and bliss of heaven.


     (b). It ends for ever our chance of merit.


In a previous Chapter we saw that the main conditions for merit  are  these:
an act must be free, unsinful, done in a state of  grace,  and  done  during
this life.


Why in this life? Because it is a MAN that  merits,  not  a  soul  separated
from its body. And death thus separates our body and soul. At  death,  then,
we cease to be human beings; for a soul is not a man,  neither  is  a  body.
Our life on earth is meant to be a time of trial and probation, in which  we
are given a chance to prove our loyalty to God, and thus  merit  His  reward
in eternity. Death ends  life;  and  with  it  the  opportunity  of  gaining
further merits. It is in this sense that Catholics interpret  the  words  of
Scripture: If the tree fall to the south or  to  the  north,  in  whatsoever
place it shall fall, there shall it be.” (Eccles. 2:3).


Since death will end forever our time of meriting, we should do our best  to
gain as much merit as we can from every act we perform, and every  suffering
we have to endure. And, since the amount  of  merit  we  gain  from  an  act
depends almost entirely on the intensity of the  supernatural  CHARITY  that
is behind it, we ought to try to increase our love  of  God  every  day,  so
that our least acts may be worthy of a great reward, as Our Lady's  were  at
Nazareth.


Let us therefore keep always in a state of grace. Let us do all things  with
a pure motive of love for God. Let us live in an ever-increasing union  with
Him, and store up for ourselves priceless treasures of merit which we  shall
be able to take with us at death, to be a crown of glory to us in eternity.


     (c). It brings before us  the  dread  alternative  of  heaven  or  hell
forever.


We who have come to the use of reason in moral matters cannot go  to  Limbo.
We must spend eternity either in heaven or in hell. Which shall it be?  That
will depend on the state of our soul at death.


It is this that makes death so dreadfully important. Think of the  happiness
of heaven, which is a sharing in the infinite happiness  of  God.  Think  of
the misery of hell, its unutterable loneliness,  its  gnawing  remorse,  its
black despair, its fire made for the devil and his angels.  Try  to  realise
that each of these is everlasting. Then you will realise the  importance  of
death.


Surely it is most reasonable for us to think often  of  death,  and  of  the
eternity which waits for us beyond the grave. Let us often think of it,  and
let us ask God to give us light to live always as  we  shall  wish  to  have
lived when death comes to put an end to our dreaming, and awaken us  to  the
awesome realities of eternity.


4. The First Judgement.


“It is appointed unto men once to  die;  and  after  this,  the  judgement.”
(Heb. 9:27).


Why is there a PARTICULAR judgement for each of us at the moment  of  death,
as well as GENERAL judgement for all at the end of the world? It is  because
each of us can be considered as an INDIVIDUAL, and as a member of the  human
RACE. As an individual each will have his own private  judgement  at  death.
As a member of the race, he will be judged with all  the  others,  publicly,
on the Last Day, when God will justify His way to men.


Like any other judgement, the  first  judgement  implies  three  things:  an
examination  of  the  case,  the  pronouncing  of  the  sentence,  and   its
execution.


The examination is conducted by God. He is Knowledge and  Truth  Itself,  so
He has no need for witnesses. Nor does He Himself  have  to  appear  to  the
soul. He has merely to give it  a  special  LIGHT  by  which  all  its  past
thoughts, words, deeds and omissions are  brought  before  it  with  perfect
clarity, so that it sees itself exactly as God sees it, and knows itself  to
be worthy of His love or punishment forever.


This perfect realisation of its condition is the sentence  passed  upon  it.
It is instantaneous. It is infallible.


The  execution  of  the  sentence  is  equally  instantaneous.  And  it   is
definitive. There can be no appeal. It is absolutely final and  irrevocable.
It can never be changed, even in eternity.


Where does this take place? Since it occurs at  the  instant  of  death,  it
takes place wherever one happens to die. The soul is not taken to heaven  to
be judged. Nor is it borne into the presence of Christ. It does not  receive
a vision of its Judge. Yet it is judged  by  God  inasmuch  as  the  infused
light which causes the judgement comes from Him. It is He who  examines  the
case, utters the sentence, and executes it.


Oh! If there is one momentous instant in existence it is this, in which  the
soul, waking up from the vanities of  the  world,  gathers  in  one  act  of
knowledge all that it has done, all that  it  has  failed  to  do,  all  its
merits and demerits, all that remains to it in the abode of its eternity.


It is in the unerring light of this one  dreadful  instant  that  we  should
measure the enticements of the world, of passion,  of  selfishness,  and  of
sin. It will show us the nothingness, the meanness,  the  treachery  of  the
world, and the cruel blindness it can exercise on those who live for it.


Often when a person dies, worldlings ask: “What did he leave?” In that  same
dread instant God is asking: “What is he taking with him?” And on  that  and
that alone depends his eternity.


5. The Worldling's View of Death.


To those who live only for this world,  death  is  the  greatest  of  evils.
Poverty, sickness, worry –  these  mar  happiness  indeed,  but  death  goes
further. It ends everything. It takes all.


Hence, worldlings usually try to distract themselves  from  the  thought  of
death. “Why think of it?” they say. “Why poison our happiness  by  breathing
prematurely the odious stench of the tomb? Why let  death's  hateful  shadow
cast a gloom over even our brightest days? It will get us in  the  end;  but
in the meantime let us forget it.”


Such persons often hope that death will come to them unexpectedly,  striking
them down without the slightest warning. For them a happy death  is  a  very
quick one in which the victim does not have time to see death coming, or  to
see himself die, as when an apparently healthy man dies during sleep.


Loathing death, worldlings fear it. This fear  they  foolishly  thrust  into
the subconscious, where  it  becomes  a  source  of  deep  misery  to  them,
poisoning their peace and happiness. Thus  they  pay  the  penalty  here  on
earth by refusing to face up to death as men. Living  only  for  this  life,
they make it impossible for it to give them the true happiness it  is  meant
by God to give. They frustrate their own efforts to be  happy.  They  expect
the impossible. They are doomed to misery in this world as well  as  in  the
next.


6. The Catholic's View of Death.


A Catholic who lives his faith in all its glorious fullness does not see  in
death the supreme evil. For him, sin is the supreme evil.  Death  is  simply
the ending of an exile. It is a going home to  his  Father's  home  of  many
mansions in heaven. With St. Paul, he can truthfully say: “For  me,  to  die
is gain.” (Phil. 1:21). What gain? Nothing less  than  the  beatific  vision
with its perfect happiness possessed in an unlosable manner forever.


In Her martyrology, the Church speaks of the day of death of each  saint  as
his “birthday,” for it is the beginning of a new life in union with  God  in
heaven. Such, too, is every good Catholic's view of  death.  For  him  death
has nothing  sinister,  gloomy  or  terrifying  about  it.  Instead,  it  is
something luminous, consoling,  peace-giving.  It  is  not  just  the  final
catastrophe, the return of the body to the dust whence it came. It is  above
all the return of the soul to God. It is His last  act  of  love  to  us  on
earth, the last  act  in   long  series  of  acts  that  stretch  back  into
eternity. It is at the same time a pledge of further love, a love that  will
never end. It is God's call to each of us  to  come  from  the  shadows  and
sufferings of this world, to share His  light  and  love  and  happiness  in
eternity.


How infinitely kind God is to us at death. Think of the means  He  has  left
us by which we can purify ourselves not only from the guilt  of  every  sin,
but also from the temporal punishment that would keep us  for  a  time  from
heaven.


There is our last CONFESSION. If we ever make a  very  fervent  and  sincere
confession, it will surely be at death. Our dispositions will  then  be  the
best possible. And a confession made with perfect dispositions can purify  a
soul to such an extent that it can go straight to heaven.


Then, our last COMMUNION. How fervent it will be!  How  full  of  adoration,
gratitude, contrition and love!! When other friends  will  kneel  helplessly
about our bed, Our Divine Friend will come into  the  depths  of  our  soul,
more near to us than we are  to  ourselves,  to  be  a  source  of  infinite
consolation and  strength  by  imparting  to  us  the  noble  sentiments  of
complete subjection to God that filled His own soul when He  summoned  death
to Himself on the Cross. And again, one Holy  Communion  made  with  perfect
dispositions can turn a sinner into a saint!


After this,  there  is  the  LAST  ANOINTING.  The  purpose  of  this  great
sacrament of God's mercy is, as we saw in a previous Chapter, to purify  the
soul completely so that it may be ready to enter heaven immediately  without
having to undergo any meritless sufferings in purgatory.


Finally, there is  the  LAST  BLESSING  which  carries  with  it  a  Plenary
Indulgence. To gain this, we must have no  attachment  to  venial  sin;  but
surely this will be easy at death, when we realise  that  we  are  about  to
leave the things of this world forever.


With all these means at our disposal, we can so purify our souls that  death
will be what God means it to be, a stepping stone to heaven. Can we  wonder,
then, that the Church in Her litany makes  us  pray  against  a  sudden  and
unprovided death?


When Cardinal Wiseman was at the point of death, one of  his  friends  asked
him how he felt. “I feel like a school boy going home for the holidays,”  he
said. And this is how good Catholics should feel at death. This is  how  you
and I will feel, if we often think of death during life, and act now  as  we
shall wish to have acted when death comes to summon us to judgement.

7. Practical Conclusions.
1.   I should do now what I shall wish to have done at death.
2.   I should often pray for the dying.
3.   I should love the Hail Mary, since in it I ask for Our Lady  to  obtain
  for me the grace of a happy death.
4.   I should also have Masses said for this great grace.
5.   I should hate sin with all  my  heart,  since  it  alone  can  make  me
  miserable at death.

                                   SUMMARY

1. God's Warning.
 (a).    He tells me that death is inevitable.
 (b).    He warns me to be always ready to die.
 (c).    He tells me what death is: the dissolution of the human composite.
2. Kinds of Death.
 (a).    Final perseverance – death in a state of grace – a happy death.
 (b).    Final impenitence – death in personal mortal sin – a bad death.
 (c).    The folly of putting off conversion.
 (d).    Examples of death-bed repentance.
3. Effects of Death.
 (a).    It strips from us all worldly goods forever.
 (b).    It ends forever our chance of merit.
 (c).    It brings before us the dread alternative: heaven or hell forever.
4. The First Judgment.
 (a).    The Particular Judgement. The General Judgement. Need for each.
 (b).    It implies: examination, sentence, execution.
 (c).    How each is carried out; and where.
5. The Worldling's View of Death.
 (a).    The greatest evil.
 (b).    Refusal to think about it.
 (c).    Fear of it poisons happiness.
6. The Catholic's View of Death.
 (a).    A going home.
 (b).    A birthday into heaven.
 (c).    God's last grace to us on earth.
 (d).    Means He has left us to die well: Last Confession. Last Communion.
   Extreme Unction. Last Blessing.
7. Practical Conclusions.

                                  EXERCISES
(A). Cross out wrong alternatives and fill in the blanks in  the  following:
–
1. Scripture says: “The (....) shall return to its earth whence it was;  and
the (....) return to God who gave it.” 2. This shows that man  is  a  (....)
being, made up  of  a  material  (....)  and  a  spiritual  (....).  3.  The
dissolution of this composite is called (....). 4. Our Lord  says:  “What  I
say to you, I say to all: (‘....’).” 5. Speaking of one who lived  just  for
this world, Our Lord said: “Thou (....)! This  night  do  they  require  thy
(....) of thee; and whose shall these things be which thou  hast  provided?”
6. Death in a state of grace is called  (....).  7.  Death  in  a  state  of
personal mortal sin is called (....). 8. We (can) (cannot) merit to  die  in
a state of grace. 9. The grace of a happy death can be gained by (....),  by
(....), and by (....). 10. A person who dies without showing  outwardly  any
signs of contrition (does) (does not) necessarily lose his soul.  11.  Death
has three main effects: it (....), it (....), and it (....). 12. The  amount
of merit we gain from an act depends almost entirely  on  the  intensity  of
the (....) with which it is done. 13. All  who  have  come  to  the  use  of
reason in moral matters will spend eternity either in (....) or  in  (....).
14. At the particular judgement the soul (sees)  (does  not  see)  God.  15.
This judgement takes place at the moment of (....).  16.  It  implies  three
things, namely (....), (....) and (....). 17. This judgement (is)  (is  not)
absolutely final. 18. The Church provides four means by which we can  purify
our soul completely at death, namely (....), (....), (....) and (....).  19.
St. Paul says: “For me, to die is (....).” 20. I should always act now as  I
shall wish to have acted at the moment of (....).

(B). Answer each of the following as fully as you can: –
1.   Explain what death is, and show that it is natural to man.
2.   How do final perseverance and final  impenitence  differ?  How  does  a
  person prepare for each?
3.   Give some examples from history of death-bed conversions.
4.   What are the three main effects of death?
5.   Explain what is meant by the Particular Judgement. When  does  it  take
  place? Where? And how? How does it differ from the General Judgement?
6.   Contrast a worldling's view of death with that of a good Catholic.
7.   What four great helps does the Church give us to  enable  us  to  enter
  heaven immediately at death?
8. Give five practical conclusions you can rightly make  from  a  meditation
  on death.
