


                                 Chapter 53


                                  PURGATORY


1. What It Is.


Guilt, a debt of punishment, evil inclinations, bad habits – these  are  the
evil effects of formal sin. How do we get rid of them?


Guilt is forgiven by an  act  of  PERFECT  CONTRITION,  or  by  a  SACRAMENT
received with imperfect contrition, or by MARTYRDOM.  It  is  either  wholly
removed, or it is not removed at all. No half measures here. It  is  all  or
nothing.


The other evil effects of sin, however, may be abolished  either  wholly  or
only in part. Martyrdom does away with all of them. So does baptism. But  an
act of perfect contrition, or  the  reception  of  a  sacrament  other  than
baptism can do this only if our dispositions are sufficiently perfect.  And,
as far as we can judge, they are rarely like that.


At death, therefore, a person may have NO GUILT OF MORTAL SIN in  his  soul;
but he may have some TEMPORAL PUNISHMENT  to  pay,  and  also  certain  EVIL
INCLINATIONS and HABITS due to sin. He may have the  GUILT  OF  VENIAL  SIN,
too, of course. What happens in his case?


It seems certain that at death the supernatural light given by God  to  such
a soul makes its charity become so  intense  that  it  forgives  the  venial
sins, and abolishes the evil tendencies and habits caused by  sin.  However,
it does not abolish the TEMPORAL PUNISHMENT.


Why not? Because  temporal  punishment  is  a  matter  of  JUSTICE,  not  of
charity. And justice demands that it remain until the debt has been paid  in
full. Otherwise, God would treat  in  the  same  way  the  fervent  and  the
lukewarm, the hero and the slacker, the coward and  the  saint.  This  would
not be fair. Moreover, it would leave us no incentive to avoid venial  sins,
and to do penance during life. It would  thus  lead  to  laxity;  hence,  to
mortal sin; hence, to hell. It is a sign of God's goodness,  then,  as  well
as of His justice, that  temporal  punishment  should  remain  after  death,
though the guilt of venial sin  and  the  other  effects  of  sin  are  then
abolished.


Now, a soul which is in grace but  which  has  temporal  punishment  to  pay
cannot go straight to the beatific  vision;  for  Scripture  tells  us  that
nothing defiled can enter heaven. Nor can such a soul go to hell,  since  it
is in a state of grace. There must, therefore, be another place to which  it
can go, until its debt has been paid either by itself or by another.


This place is called PURGATORY. The term is not a very  apt  one,  since  it
comes from a Latin word meaning “to purify.” Purgatory is  not  primarily  a
place for purifying souls.  That  is  done  at  the  instant  of  death.  In
purgatory, it is a question of PAYING A DEBT to  GOD.  It  is  a  matter  of
CHASTISEMENT.  Hence,  of  EXPIATION   and   REPARATION   rather   than   of
purification. Up to the eleventh century it  was  known  as  “the  place  of
groans and tears,” “the gloomy way,” “the transitory fire,”  and  the  like.
These terms left out the happiness of the souls in purgatory; but  they  did
stress its main purpose – that of reparation, the paying of a debt  to  God.
We can therefore define PURGATORY as a PLACE and a STATE in which the  souls
of persons who die in GRACE  suffer  for  a  time  on  account  of  TEMPORAL
PUNISHMENT due to sins committed after BAPTISM, before they are admitted  to
HEAVEN.


2. How We know That It Exists.


We are quite certain that purgatory exists, because GOD has told us that  it
does. We accept its existence on His AUTHORITY, by an act of  divine  FAITH.
And we are equally certain  that  He  has  revealed  its  existence  to  us,
because the CHURCH assures us infallibly that He has.  In  doing  this,  She
interprets both SCRIPTURE and TRADITION for us, unerringly.


As for Scripture,  the  doctrine  of  purgatory  is  contained  in  the  Old
Testament. There, we read how Judas  Macchabeus  sent  gold  and  silver  to
Jerusalem to have sacrifice offered for the souls of his  soldiers  who  had
died in battle. Now he, and all who gave these gifts, and  the  priests  who
offered the sacrifice knew that it was no use for them to pray for souls  in
heaven, nor for souls in hell. Hence, they must  have  believed  in  another
place in which the dead could be helped by us on earth. And the  point  that
matters here  is  this:  Scripture  APPROVES  of  their  conduct,  since  it
immediately adds: “IT IS A HOLY AND WHOLESOME THOUGHT TO PRAY FOR THE  DEAD,
THAT THEY MAY BE LOOSED FROM THEIR SINS.”(2  Macch.  12:39-46).  A  soul  is
wholly loosed from sin when it is freed  even  from  the  debt  of  temporal
punishment due to sin, and allowed to enter heaven.  By  thus  APPROVING  of
this action, the principal Author of Scripture,  who  is  GOD,  approves  of
belief in purgatory. In other words, He reveals its existence.


In the New Testament also there  are  texts  which  the  Church  has  always
interpreted of purgatory. St. Paul, for instance, warns some of his  priests
that their preaching, though substantially correct, is marred  by  vainglory
and other unworthy motives. Instead of building on  Christ  a  structure  of
“gold,  silver  and  precious  stones”  as  do  those  whose  preaching   is
faultless, they are building one in “wood, hay and stubble.” These  inferior
materials which symbolise the preachers' faults, will, St. Paul asserts,  be
destroyed by fire after their death. This  fire  cannot  be  that  in  hell,
since he admits that these men will save their souls. Their  sins  are  only
venial. It must, therefore, be the fire in purgatory from  which  they  will
suffer till they have fully paid their debt to God. (1 Cor.3:10-15).


Early writers such as Origen, Basil, Cyril of  Jerusalem,  Jerome,  Ambrose,
Augustine and Gregory the Great gave this interpretation of  this  text.  So
did most of the writers of the Middle Ages, including  St.  Thomas  Aquinas.
So do most Catholic  Biblical  experts  today.  Other  texts  from  the  New
Testament could also be given, did space permit.


Tradition is likewise clear. Many pages could be filled with  extracts  from
the early fathers concerning  purgatory.  You  have  merely  to  recall  St.
Monica's request to her son, St. Augustine, to say Mass for her  soul  after
her death. Moreover,  in  the  catacombs  there  are  numerous  inscriptions
begging Masses and prayers for  the  faithful  departed.  The  most  ancient
liturgies also testify to a universal belief in  purgatory.  Even  if  there
were no references to it in Scripture, therefore, we would still be sure  of
its existence. What matters is the infallible teaching of  the  Church;  for
She  is  the  divinely-appointed  guardian  of  Christ's  truths  and  their
divinely-protected interpreter on earth. “He that heareth you, heareth  Me,”
He says of Her. And She has infallibly defined the dogma of purgatory as  an
article of faith. That settles the matter forever.


3. The Fittingness of Purgatory.


Protestants are opposed to purgatory because of  their  teaching  that  good
works are of no value for salvation; and that  some  persons  are  taken  to
heaven while others are sent to hell, apart from any good or evil  they  may
have done during life. Unless a man's judgement  is  warped  by  some  gross
error such as this, it is hard to see how he can be  opposed  to  purgatory.
As a doctrine, it has much to recommend it. Think a  little,  and  you  will
see.


About 100 persons die every minute. About 6,000, every hour.  About  140,000
every day. How many are so perfect that  their  souls  can  go  straight  to
heaven? Comparatively few, as far as we can  judge.  Deny  purgatory,  then,
and what happens? You must consign the vast majority to  hell.  The  thought
is monstrous. Most people are not good enough to enter heaven at death,  nor
bad enough to deserve hell. So there must be another place beyond the  grave
where they can suffer and thus pay any debt still owing to God. Even  PLATO,
who knew nothing  about  God's  revelation,  was  firmly  convinced  of  the
existence of such a place.


Moreover, the  doctrine  of  purgatory  manifests  in  a  splendid  way  the
attributes of God. It manifests His SANCTITY, since it shows hows  perfectly
free from blemish a soul must be to enter heaven. It proclaims  His  JUSTICE
also, because it tells us that  no  souls  are  sent  to  hell  unless  they
deliberately refuse to repent even at the last moment; while  those  who  go
to purgatory are kept there till the debt they owe has been  paid  in  full.
It shows forth, above all, God's MERCY, since it enables even  the  greatest
sinners to repent on their death-bed, with  the  assurance  of  still  being
able to make everything right with God, and enter heaven honourably  in  the
end.


At the same time, this doctrine is a most consoling one for us  all.  As  we
have just said, it shows  even  the  greatest  sinner  that  he  need  never
despair. “If I had still some years to live,” such a  one  may  say  on  his
death-bed, “I would turn to God, for I could then make  reparation  to  Him;
but it is too late. To turn to Him now would be to ask  for  heaven  without
having in the least deserved it. It would be a  dishonourable  thing.”  When
such a person realises that, thanks to purgatory, he will be  able  to  make
full reparation to God after he has truly merited  the  beatific  vision  by
the grace given on his repentance, he is almost always  ready  to  make  his
peace with God. To great  sinners,  then,  purgatory  is  a  most  consoling
doctrine. But it is also consoling  even  to  the  saintliest  men;  for  it
enables them to hope for the salvation even of those who seem to  have  died
a bad death. Recall the case of suicide mentioned in the last Chapter.


It is consoling also in another way. “I never realised how good he was  till
now,” an unbeliever may exclaim at the grave-side of a  friend.  “I  wish  I
had been more thoughtful to him; but it is too late  now.”  For  us,  it  is
never too late. Our belief in purgatory enables our love to pass beyond  the
barriers of death. It enables us to turn wishes into  prayers,  daily  deeds
into sacrifices, sufferings into satisfactions, all of which  we  can  offer
to God to speed the souls of our beloved towards eternal  life.  Death  does
not cut off our gratitude. Nor does the grave stop short our love.  Instead,
it merely sharpens our sense of obligation towards the dead.


Besides urging us to fulfil  our  duties  towards  the  dead  by  practising
charity in their regard, the doctrine of purgatory is beneficial  to  us  in
many other ways. For instance, by bringing home to us the infinite  sanctity
and justice of God, it incites us to avoid even the least sins, to  practise
all the virtues, and to do penance. It thus moves us to  avoid  laxity,  and
to strive for perfection, even the heroic perfection of the saints.


Finally, it is most beneficial and consoling  to  the  dead.  Unable  to  do
anything to help themselves, they are delighted to know  that  we  can  help
them, and that they cannot ever be completely forgotten as long as  Mass  is
offered on the earth. Truly, then, the doctrine of  purgatory  has  a  great
deal to recommend it. However, it is not for these  reasons  of  fittingness
that we believe in it; but simply and solely because God, who  is  Knowledge
and Truth Itself, has made its existence known to us.


4. Its Sufferings.


The main suffering in purgatory is the PAIN OF LOSS, caused by the delay  of
the BEATIFIC VISION.


There is a pain of loss also in  hell;  but  the  condition  of  a  soul  in
purgatory is very different from that of a soul in hell. In the first  place
a soul in purgatory is filled with the  love  of  God.  It  is  also  wholly
submissive to His will. Hence, it accepts with  intense  joy  and  gratitude
the punishment it has merited. A soul in hell, on the contrary,  hates  God,
and it is in  perpetual  rebellion  against  Divine  Justice  punishing  it.
Moreover, a soul in purgatory has the joyful hope  of  being  admitted  some
day to heaven. It is quite sure  of  its  salvation  and  its  happiness  in
eternity. But a soul in hell knows no hope.  It  is  a  prey  instead  to  a
despair that can never end. Purgatory, remember, is a sort of  vestibule  to
heaven. Hell is simply hell.


The pain of loss in purgatory  is  a  sort  of  spiritual  hunger  for  God.
Through the supernatural light given it, a soul there realises most  clearly
that He is the Sovereign Good, and that  it  is  made  for  union  with  Him
forever. It is also given a revelation of the infinite love  with  which  He
has always loved it. It yearns  to  love  Him  in  return.  It  feels  drawn
irresistibly to Him. But it realises that it cannot go to  Him  as  yet.  It
has still a debt to pay Him. Hence, it longs to pay this debt.  It  welcomes
its sufferings. Its pain is thus an agony  of  longing,  a  hunger  for  the
Infinite. But, like the paralytic  at  the  side  of  the  healing  pool  at
Bethsaida, it can do nothing to help itself. It can only suffer, and wait.


Intense regrets at not having used the means of  avoiding  purgatory  during
life; anxiety due to the uncertainty of the hour  of  its  delivery;  sorrow
caused by the neglect of friends on earth –  these  and  similar  sufferings
are also found in purgatory. But they all flow from the pain  of  loss,  the
torment of love caused by the postponement of the beatific vision.


Is there material fire in purgatory? The Church so far has not defined  that
there is. However, since its presence is taught by most theologians,  it  is
prudent for us to accept  their  teaching.  St.  Thomas  tells  us  that  it
torments the soul by imprisoning it, paralysing, as it were,  its  spiritual
activities, thus causing it the most profound humiliation. This  is  a  very
ingenious explanation. Think of a paralysed man. His limbs  refuse  to  obey
his will. This domination of matter over the soul can cause great  suffering
even in this life. It can be far  worse  in  purgatory;  for  there  a  soul
should normally enjoy the glorious liberty of a separated spirit.


Will purgatory continue to exist after the Last  Day?  The  sentence  to  be
uttered then will concern only hell and heaven: “Come,  you  blessed  of  My
Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you  from  the  foundation  of  the
world.” “Depart from Me,  you  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  which  was
prepared for the devil and his angels.” (Mat. 25: 34,  42).  No  mention  of
purgatory.


How long will purgatory last for any individual soul? That  depends  on  its
debt, the help given it by others,  and  especially  on  the  will  of  God,
acting according to His infinite wisdom. A soul in  purgatory  is  in  time,
not in eternity. But it is different from our time. Ours is the  measure  of
continuous movement; hence it is itself continuous. In  purgatory,  time  is
the  measure  of  the  successive  thoughts  and  affections  of  the  souls
imprisoned there.  So  it  is  discontinuous.  One  thought  lasts  for  one
spiritual instant. It may be equal to a thousand  years  of  our  time.  The
next thought has its own instant. This shows how the souls of those who  die
on the last day can suffer their purgatory in an  instant.  It  also  brings
home to us how concentrated these sufferings can be. It should fill us  with
sympathy for the holy souls, and make  us  eager  to  help  them.  They  can
indeed make their own Job's touching plea: “Have pity on me,  have  pity  on
me, at least you, my friends, for the hand of the  Lord  hath  touched  me.”
(Job 19:21).


The sufferings endured by the holy souls are almost certainly  greater  than
any we can experience on earth. Yet they cannot merit any reward in  heaven.
The time for meriting ends at death. This should make us anxious  to  fulfil
our purgatory on earth. We should ask God for this grace.





5. Its Joys.


Just as there are no morose saints on earth, there are no  gloomy  souls  in
purgatory. They are all intensely happy. Their profound love of God  is  the
main source of their joy. Another  is  the  certainty  of  their  salvation.
Another, the perfection of their knowledge. Another, the  excellent  company
they enjoy, and their relations with other souls in heaven and on earth.


Purgatory is like a very happy railway station or  airport.  Its  population
is an ever-shifting one. Some souls  are  constantly  arriving  from  earth;
others, departing for heaven. A hearty welcome is given  to  the  former;  a
rousing send-off, to the  latter.  Envy,  jealousy,  hatred,  quarrelling  –
these and similar evils that mar our  happiness  on  earth  are  unknown  in
purgatory. There, right order reigns, and with it peace  and  joy,  even  in
the midst of their sufferings, as was the case also of  Our  Divine  Saviour
on the Cross.


6. Who Can Help The Holy Souls?


No soul can help itself to get out of  purgatory;  but  each  can  help  the
others. Its intense charity urges it to do this.


Can souls in heaven be of any help? Yes. They cannot  suffer  for  them,  of
course, for suffering is impossible in heaven. But they  can  help  them  by
their petitions, just as they can intercede for us on earth.


We can help the holy souls most of all, because we can suffer and thus  make
satisfaction for them. Moreover, we can offer Mass for them, and  thus  give
them some of the satisfactions won by Christ. We can  also  win  indulgences
for them. We can help them in many other ways  as  well.  All  this  follows
from the Communion of Saints, from the fact  that  the  Church  Militant  on
earth, the Church Suffering in  purgatory,  and  the  Church  Triumphant  in
heaven form but one Mystical Body, sharing in common the  good  things  that
its Head has given it. Just as one member of a family on earth can  pay  the
debt of another member, we can pay the debt of temporal punishment  which  a
soul in purgatory owes to God, and thus secure its entry into heaven.


7. How We Can Help Them.


     (a). Prayer.


In itself, prayer is not a MERIT – a right to an  increase  in  sanctity  on
earth, and in glory in heaven. Nor is it a SATISFACTION – a suffering  borne
to pay our debt of punishment due to sin. It is a REQUEST –  the  act  of  a
beggar holding out his hand. It appeals to the goodness  and  mercy  of  the
one  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  From  this  flows   its   mighty   power,
proportionate as this is to the infinite goodness and mercy of God.


In addition to its power as a petition, our  prayer  has  also  a  power  of
SATISFACTION, since it always involves some self-denial on our  part,  hence
some suffering. This is why our prayers can be far more  profitable  to  the
holy souls than can the prayers of souls in heaven.


We should, therefore, often pray for the dead. It is so easy. Anyone can  do
it, any time, any place. We may say prayers specially framed for them,  such
as those found in a Requiem Mass, a funeral service, or the Office  for  the
dead. But we can offer any prayers at all for their benefit  –  the  Rosary,
for instance, or grace said before and after meals.  It  is  good  to  offer
them through Our Lady and the other saints so that these  may  present  them
to God enriched by their own glory and the power of their intercession.


     (b). Good Works.


Of the many good works that we can do,  Scripture  lays  special  stress  on
ALMSGIVING. It has a particular value, perhaps,  on  account  of  the  self-
denial it entails because of our natural  attachment  to  money.  We  should
remember this whenever we give a poor man a dollar, or  put  something  into
the plate on Sundays, or make a donation to an orphanage,  say,  or  to  the
foreign missions. Its value as satisfaction will depend  on  the  purity  of
our intention, the amount of charity  behind  our  act,  and  our  financial
position. Remember the widow's mite, and Our Saviour's comment on her  alms:
“Verily, I say to you, this poor woman hath cast in  more  than  they  all.”
(Luke 21:4). On another occasion He told us that if we give  but  a  cup  of
cold water to another in His name, we  shall  not  lose  our  reward.  (Mat.
10:42). And on the Last Day He will say: “As often as you did it to  one  of
these My least brethren, you did it unto ME.” (Mat. 25:40) .


Scripture also stresses the value of FASTING. It  also  entails  real  self-
denial. But in addition to these two works,  there  are  innumerable  others
that we can offer for the benefit of the holy souls – our  daily  work,  for
example, carried out with care, with purity of intention, and a  great  love
for God and for our  neighbour  with  whom  Our  Saviour  has  in  some  way
identified Himself.


     (c). Sufferings.


We should never love suffering for its own sake. We should do  our  best  to
lessen it in others. But suffering  entailed  in  avoiding  sin  and  living
wholly for God, we should never shirk. Then there will be  other  sufferings
over which we have no control  –  those  caused  by  bereavement,  sickness,
accidents, and the like. To these we can add a reasonable amount  of  freely
imposed penances to bring our self-denial to the lofty level of  the  golden
mean of the supernatural virtue of  temperance.  Finally,  when  forming  an
intention for all these sufferings, we should not neglect the holy souls.


     (d). The Mass.


The Mass is the best means we have for helping souls in purgatory. One  Mass
can free any soul, provided that all the satisfaction it proffers  is  given
it by God. He will give all, or only some, according  to  His  wisdom  which
takes into account the soul's right to receive help. Thus, a  poor  man  who
has one Mass said for a deceased friend may benefit him  more  than  a  rich
man who has many Masses offered, without any  great  sacrifice  to  himself.
How foolish it is, then, for a rich man to think that he  will  be  able  to
buy his way out of purgatory! He has a poor idea of the infinite justice  of
God.


What about Holy Communion? We cannot directly benefit the holy souls by  our
Communion, since, like baptism, it is for the sanctification of  the  person
who receives it. However, we can associate them with it by praying for  them
during thanksgiving. Our prayers then  have  a  special  value.  Of  course,
Communion is important when its reception is one of the conditions  required
for gaining an indulgence for the dead.


     (e). Indulgences.


By  His  death,  Christ  won  an  inexhaustible   supply   of   merits   and
satisfactions, which He intended to be given to individual souls, on to  the
end of the world. Hence, he committed them, as He  did  His  sacraments  and
truths, to the safe keeping of His Church. He  established  what  is  called
the TREASURY of the Church.  Into  it,  too,  have  gone  the  satisfactions
gained by His Immaculate Mother, and the surplus satisfactions of His  other
saints. Its riches, as we have said, are inexhaustible.


This is why the Church, by drawing on this treasury, can attach to any  good
act a power of abolishing TEMPORAL PUNISHMENT greater  than  that  which  it
has by its own nature. In other words, attach an INDULGENCE to it.


In doing this she is merely putting into practice the power given by  Christ
when He said: “Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall  be  loosed  also
in heaven.” (Mat. 18:18). These words empower her not only  to  forgive  the
guilt of sin, but also  to  abolish  from  contrite  souls  all  other  evil
effects of sin that can keep us out of heaven. And  temporal  punishment  is
one of these.


An INDULGENCE, then, is a remission of TEMPORAL PUNISHMENT due to sin  after
the GUILT itself has been forgiven, granted by the CHURCH from the  TREASURY
established  by  Christ.  It  concerns,  of  course,  sins  committed  after
baptism.  And  the  Church  here  acts,  as  does  any  other   society   in
distributing goods to its members,  through  Her  visible  head,  the  Pope,
Christ's vicar on earth.


Note that an indulgence  is  in  no  sense  a  permission  to  sin.  On  the
contrary, it presupposes that the recipient is sorry for his  sin,  and  has
had it forgiven. This is why a person who is attached to venial sins  cannot
gain a plenary indulgence. Temporal punishment due to these sins  cannot  be
remitted, since the guilt has not yet been forgiven. It is  sheer  nonsense,
therefore, for Protestants to say that an indulgence is a permit to sin.


Indulgences are either PLENARY or  PARTIAL.  A  PLENARY  indulgence  is  one
which can free a soul of ALL temporal punishment so far due to  it.  If  you
gain one and apply it to a soul in purgatory, are you sure  that  this  soul
will go straight to heaven? No. God may refuse to allow it to  profit  fully
by the indulgence offered.


A PARTIAL indulgence is one which does not necessarily abolish ALL  temporal
punishment, even when applied in full to a particular soul.  If  a  soul  is
granted this, does it shorten its stay  in  purgatory  by  forty  days?  No.
There are no days in purgatory. However it does get remitted  an  amount  of
temporal  punishment  equal  to  that  which  it  would  have  abolished  by
performing one of the early CANONICAL PENANCES for forty  days.  These  were
often very severe – fasting on bread and water, for instance,  or  making  a
long pilgrimage on foot, or kissing the  feet  of  those  who  went  into  a
Church on Sundays. Since these penances varied greatly from place to  place,
and since their value as satisfaction depended largely on  the  dispositions
of those who performed them, no accurate estimation can be  given  of  their
value to a soul in purgatory. The amount of temporal punishment remitted  by
a particular indulgence thus remains uncertain. It depends  greatly  on  the
fervour of the one who acquires it.


To gain an indulgence, we must be baptised, be not  excommunicated,  and  be
in a state of grace. We must also have the intention  of  gaining  it  –  at
least an habitual one, one  made  and  not  revoked.  Finally,  we  must  do
exactly what the Church prescribes, as when She bids  us  go  to  confession
and Communion, visit a church, pray for the Pope's intention, and so on.  To
gain a plenary indulgence,  as  we  have  already  said,  we  must  have  no
attachment to venial sins. Hence it is wise for us to make  a  very  sincere
act of perfect contrition when attempting to gain such an indulgence. It  is
worth noting here that all indulgences granted by the  Pope  are  applicable
to the holy souls, unless declared to be otherwise.


It is very  foolish  for  us  to  neglect  indulgences.  They  are  precious
benefits offered by the mercy of God. By them  we  can  greatly  lessen  and
even completely abolish our own purgatory. We can also help the  holy  souls
to enter heaven. Their practice, moreover,  keeps  before  our  minds  great
truths such as the justice and mercy of God, the necessity of  penance,  the
Communion of the Saints, the existence of purgatory, and the  power  of  the
Church to administer the good things left  to  Her  by  Christ.  Indulgences
also move us to perform good works such as going  to  confession,  receiving
Communion, visiting the church, making  the  Stations,  performing  acts  of
devotion to the Sacred Heart, Our  Lady,  the  Blessed  Eucharist,  and  the
like. However, they should never cause  us  to  neglect  works  of  penance.
These are still necessary if we are to  imitate  our  Crucified  Saviour  as
true Christians, heal the ugly wounds left in us by original sin, and  raise
our daily life to the level of the beatific vision which we  hope  to  enjoy
in eternity.


     (f). The Heroic Act.


This consists in giving up all the SATISFACTIONS we may gain by future  good
works; also all the INDULGENCES, except the plenary indulgence we  may  gain
at death; also the SUFFRAGES or helps that will be offered for us  after  we
are dead. These are renounced for the benefit of the  holy  souls  –  either
ones chosen by us or by Our Lady. This act is sometimes called  a  vow.  But
it is not a vow. It is a mere promise. In making it, one  should  intend  to
keep it for life. However, it can be revoked at any  time  and  without  any
sin. No set words are required in making it. The mere intention is enough.


In making it, we do not renounce the MERIT attached to it – the increase  it
brings in grace on earth and in  glory  in  heaven.  It  is  a  question  of
SATISFACTION, not of merit. Nor do we give up the satisfaction made by  this
act ITSELF. That remains to us. But all satisfactions made AFTER it –  these
are renounced.


The heroic act has been recommended by several Popes.  Many  privileges  are
attached to  it.  Before  making  it,  however,  one  should  consult  one's
spiritual adviser. It is not meant for lax Catholics. After all,  it  is  an
HEROIC act; and the heroism is one in CHARITY.


8. Why We Should Help Them.


     (a). Charity.


The holy souls have a claim in charity to our help.  The  law  of  fraternal
charity the fulfilment of which is the one genuine sign of our love  of  God
extends to them as well as to all our fellow-men on earth. We  cannot  truly
love God, if we exclude them from our love.


Relatives, friends and benefactors have, of course, a special claim  to  our
help, based on love, gratitude and honour.  It  is  inexcusable  for  us  to
neglect them.


     (b). Justice.


Some souls may even have a claim in justice, either because we have been  in
some way responsible for their sins, or because of the  way  in  which  they
sacrificed themselves for the common good when they were on earth.


     (c). Self-interest.


In helping the souls in purgatory we are practising charity; hence,  heaping
up for ourselves imperishable riches  in  heaven.  Moreover,  if  we  go  to
purgatory ourselves, we shall profit by help offered us to the  extent  that
we have been devoted to the holy souls during life. Lastly,  they  can  help
us by their prayers – to pass an examination, for example.


9. How We Can Avoid Purgatory.


“Avoid it!” a Catholic may say, “I'll be lucky  if  I  get  there!”  Such  a
person forgets that the attaining of  purgatory  is  not  the  ideal  for  a
Christian. In God's plan, the immediate entry into heaven at  death  is  the
RULE; purgatory, the EXCEPTION. So there is no presumption and  no  lack  of
humility in a Catholic's determination to avoid purgatory. If  we  go  there
instead of straight to heaven, the fault will be  our  own.  We  shall  have
failed  to  use  the  means  Christ  has  left  us  for  avoiding  meritless
sufferings after death. Here are the main ones.


     (a). Martyrdom.


A martyr's soul goes straight to heaven, because martyrdom configures it  to
Christ's soul at the moment of His death on the  Cross.  We  cannot  all  be
martyrs in the strict sense of those who are put to death through hatred  of
the Christian religion. This is a splendid death in  which  men  pay  Christ
back in kind. It is for the chosen few. However, we can all  be  martyrs  in
the wide sense, martyrs to our  DUTIES  OF  STATE,  by  fulfilling  them  as
perfectly as we can, with purity of intention and intense  charity.  We  can
all be heroes and heroines to duty.


     (b). Baptism.


Baptism received at death admits a soul immediately  to  heaven.  Those  who
receive this sacrament after they have come to  the  use  of  reason  should
realise that it abolishes all temporal punishment due  so  far  to  sin.  By
avoiding future sins as far as they can, and by doing penance  for  the  few
they may commit, they can reasonably hope to avoid purgatory at death.


     (c). Indulgences.


By gaining these often during life, and  especially  by  winning  a  plenary
indulgence at death, we can make sure of going straight to heaven,  provided
our dispositions allow God to apply it fully to our soul.


     (d). The Mass.


It is far wiser to have Masses said for  final  perseverance  than  to  have
them said for us after death. During life, we are under the jurisdiction  of
the Church, and therefore INFALLIBLY receive the fruit of a  Mass,  just  as
we do also of a sacrament, unless we place an obstacle. After death, we  are
no longer under Her jurisdiction. She can then only ask God to apply a  Mass
to our soul. He may, or He may not. That  depends  on  His  wisdom.  A  rich
person who has many Masses said for  himself  while  alive  can  get  enough
grace from them to become a saint, and so have no purgatory at  death.  Said
after his death, they might benefit him but little. This shows  how  prudent
it is to have Masses offered for the living, as well as for the dead.


     (e). The Sacraments.


These can all help us to avoid purgatory by  the  graces  they  give  us  to
avoid  sin.  No  sin,  no  temporal  punishment,  no  purgatory.  Among  the
sacraments, however, Extreme  Unction  is  especially  valuable,  since  its
purpose is to fit the soul for immediate entry into heaven.








     (f). The Religious Life.


The fulfilment of the three vows of chastity, poverty and obedience  entails
so much self-denial that religious who are  true  to  the  duties  of  their
state can reasonably hope to avoid purgatory. Pope Benedict XIV  once  said:
“Give me a religious who has always faithfully  observed  his  rule,  and  I
will canonise him immediately.”


Though living in the world, lay persons can do the same if  they  live  with
the spirit of the vows, by being wholly detached  from  riches,  by  obeying
God's laws and those of His Church, and by being true to  their  obligations
in the married  state.  Like  religious,  they  will  receive  the  promised
hundredfold in this life, and the beatific vision immediately at death.


     (g). A Spirit of Penance.


This consists in hating sin, making reparation  for  it,  and  resolving  to
avoid it in future. It shows itself in an  eagerness  to  avoid  unnecessary
occasions of sin, to  fulfil  the  fasts  and  abstinences  imposed  by  the
Church, to make voluntary acts of self-denial, to forgive  others  from  the
heart, and to judge them with mercy. It is  a  great  means  for  abolishing
purgatory.


     (h). Suffering.


We have all many sufferings  to  endure,  physical,  mental  and  moral.  By
accepting these with loving resignation to  God's  all-holy  Providence,  we
can do a great deal to make sure of immediate entry into  heaven  at  death.
No need for us, then, to have to bear meritless sufferings after  death.  We
can so easily get them over in this life, with merit for eternity.


10. Practical Conclusions.


1. I should pray for the holy souls every time I pass a cemetery or  see  a
   funeral.


2. I should remember them whenever I give an alms.


3. I should make a daily intention to gain all indulgences I can.


4. I should take all the means I have of avoiding purgatory.


5. I should be truly devoted to the holy souls, since suffrages offered for
   me will benefit me in purgatory to the extent that I  have  helped  them
   during my life.








                                   SUMMARY


1. Purgatory.
 (a). Effects of sin: guilt, punishment, evil inclinations and habits.
 (b). How these are abolished.
 (c). Need of purgatory.
 (d). Definition of purgatory.
2. How We Know It Exists.
 (a). Our act of divine faith.
 (b). Role of the Church.
 (c). Scripture and Tradition.
3. Fittingness of Purgatory.
 (a). Many not good enough for heaven, or bad enough for hell.
 (b). Manifests God's sanctity, justice, and mercy.
 (c). Most consoling and beneficial both to the living and the dead.
4. Its Sufferings.
 (a). Pain of loss. (b). Other sufferings.
 (c). Material fire.
 (d). Duration.
5. Its Joys.
 (a). Their source. (b). Their nature.
6. Who Can Help The Holy Souls.
 (a). Other souls in purgatory.
 (b). Souls in heaven.
 (c). Persons on earth.
7. How We Can Help Them.
 (a). Prayer.
 (b). Good works, Alms-giving. Fasting.
 (c). Our sufferings.
 (d). The Mass.
 (e). Indulgences.
 (f). The Heroic Act.
8. Why We Ought to Help Them.
 (a). Charity. (b). Justice. (c). Self-interest.
9. How We Can Avoid Purgatory.
 (a). Martyrdom.
 (b). Baptism.
 (c). Indulgences.
 (d). The Mass.
 (e). The Sacraments.
 (f). The Religious Life.
 (g). A spirit of penance.
 (h). Sufferings.
10. Practical Conclusions.




                                  EXERCISES

(A). Cross out wrong alternatives and fill in blanks in the following : –
1. Four effects of formal sin are (....), (....), (....), (....).  2.  Guilt
is  abolished  by  (....),  and  (....).  3.  It  is  abolished  (partially)
(wholly). 4. The forgiving of sin  (does)  (does  not)  necessarily  abolish
also all temporal punishment due to sin. 5. The guilt of venial sin and  all
evil inclinations and habits due to  sin  are  abolished  at  death  by  the
fervour of the soul's (....). 6. Any (....) due to  sin,  however,  remains,
7. This (can) (cannot) keep a soul  from  entering  heaven  immediately.  8.
Purgatory is a (....) and a (....) in which the souls of  persons  who  have
died in (....) suffer on account of the (....) due to sins  committed  after
(....), before they can be admitted into (....). 9. We know  that  purgatory
exists because (....) has told us that it does. 10.  We  know  that  He  has
done this because (....) assures us infallibly  that  He  has.  11.  It  was
(....) who sent gold and silver to Jerusalem to have sacrifice  offered  for
the dead. 12. Scriptures approved of his action  when  it  said:  “It  is  a
(....) and (....) thought to pray for the (....) that they may  be  (....).”
13. It was St. (....) who begged her son, Augustine, to have Mass  said  for
her soul after her death. 14. At death most people are not  good  enough  to
go straight to (....), nor bad enough  to  go  to  (....).  This  shows  how
reasonable it is to believe in the existence of (.... ).  15.  The  doctrine
of purgatory brings home to us God's (....), His  (....),  and  His  (....).
16. The main suffering in purgatory is (....). 17. It consists in the  delay
of the (....). 18. It is an intense spiritual hunger  for  (....).  19.  The
Church (has) (has not) defined that there is  material  fire  in  purgatory.
20. There will be no purgatory after the  (....).  21.  Souls  in  purgatory
(do)  (do  not)  experience  great  joy.  22.  They  (can)   (cannot)   help
themselves; they (can) (cannot) help  other  souls  there.  23.  They  (can)
(cannot) be helped by souls in heaven. 24. We can help  them  most,  because
our good deeds entail (....); hence, win (merit)  (satisfaction)  for  them.
25. We can help them by (....), (....), (....), (....), (....), (....).  26.
It (is) (is not) contrary to humility to wish to  avoid  purgatory.  27.  We
can avoid it by (....), (….) (….) (….) (….),  (....),  (....),  (....).  28.
The Church on earth is called the Church (....); the Church in purgatory  is
called the Church (....); the Church in heaven is called the Church  (....);
 all form one organism called the (....) Body of Christ. 29. The Heroic  Act
(is) (is not) a vow. 30. If I  go  to  purgatory  I  shall  benefit  by  the
suffrages offered for me to the extent that I have been  devoted  to  (....)
while on earth.

(B). Answer each of the following as fully as you can:-
1. Explain what purgatory is; and show that belief in it  is  supported  by
   Scripture and by Tradition.
2. Give reasons to show the fittingness of this doctrine.
3. Explain the sufferings in purgatory.
4. Explain the source and nature of its joys.
5. Give six ways in which we can help the holy souls.
6. Show why we ought help them.
7. Explain the  doctrine  of  indulgences.  What  is  meant  by  a  plenary
   indulgence, and by a partial indulgence?
8. Explain why we should try to avoid purgatory; and  give  all  the  means
   Christ has left us for doing this.
