


                                 Chapter 54


                               HEAVEN AND HELL


Introduction: MAN'S LAST END.


Since God is infinite Wisdom, He has to make us for a PURPOSE. He must  give
us a LAST END. This can be nothing else than the promoting of His  GLORY  in
eternity, since all the  reality  in  us  comes  unceasingly  from  Him  and
therefore witnesses to His perfections,  just  as  a  great  painting  shows
forth the genius of its author. And, since God  can  never  do  anything  in
VAIN, the end for which He created us must be fulfilled.


However, God respects our NATURE as rational beings  endowed  with  freedom.
Hence, once we have come to the use of reason, He gives us a  CHOICE  as  to
the WAY in which we shall promote His glory in  eternity.  We  can  do  this
either by freely  co-operating  with  His  grace,  and  winning  HEAVEN  for
ourselves, or by deliberately refusing to co-operate with  it,  and  putting
ourselves in HELL. Heaven or hell – one  or  other  will  be  our  abode  in
eternity according to the choice we make.


                                  A. HEAVEN


1. Man's Greatest Needs.


     (a). Knowledge.


Man is man because of his spiritual soul with its two  spiritual  faculties,
intellect and will. His first need as man, then, is to KNOW. The human  soul
thirsts for knowledge. The child with his endless questions,  the  scientist
absorbed in a problem, people poring over the evening paper or listening  to
the radio news – these are all seeking knowledge. They are all in  quest  of
truth.


But all the knowledge that men may gather  from  generations  of  study  and
research is only a partial, a veiled glimpse of  God's  knowledge  reflected
in the creatures He has made. He IS Knowledge. He IS Truth Itself.


In  heaven,  therefore,  man's  thirst  for  knowledge  will  be   perfectly
satisfied; for there the blessed SEE God, not with the  eyes  of  the   body
indeed, since He is a Spirit, but with their intellect  which  is  made  for
truth. They SEE His ESSENCE, His ATTRIBUTES, the  PERSONS  in  the  TRINITY.
They SEE Him AS HE IS.


Our Divine Lord assures us of this when He says: “Blessed are the  clean  of
heart, for they shall SEE God.” (Mat. 5:8). The context  shows  that  He  is
referring not only to the splendid knowledge that the pure have  of  God  in
this world through the Gifts of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  especially  to  the
VISION that they will have of His ESSENCE in the next.


How do the blessed SEE God? Do they know Him by means of  created  ideas  in
the way we know Him on earth? No. Created  ideas  are  necessarily  limited.
Hence, they can never adequately express the infinite. Not by means of  them
do the blessed know God. How then?  By  means  of  HIMSELF.  For  them,  His
ESSENCE is at once THAT WHICH is known, and THAT BY WHICH it is known.  They
see God IMMEDIATELY, without the help of any created medium  whatever.  This
is why they SEE Him AS HE IS.


Scripture again assures us of this. Listen to St. Paul. “We see now  through
a glass in a dark manner; but then, FACE TO FACE; now, I know in  part;  but
then I shall know EVEN AS I AM KNOWN.” (1  Cor.  13:12).  A  glorious  text,
this. It contrasts the knowledge we have of  God  in  this  life  with  that
which we shall have of Him in heaven. On  earth,  we  know  Him  only  in  a
glass, a mirror, the creatures He has made. They  reflect  His  perfections,
indeed; but how inadequately! They do enable us to know Him,  but  only  “in
part,” as St. Paul says. And this is true even for the knowledge we have  of
God through the truths He has revealed to us; for these are all  necessarily
expressed in ideas taken from  creatures.  Immeasurably  superior  will  our
knowledge in heaven be; for there we shall see Him “face to  face”;  and  we
shall know Him in the same WAY as we “are known” by Him.  But  He  knows  us
without the help of any created medium whatever, for He knows us IN  and  BY
Himself. So the vision given of the divine essence  in  heaven  must  be  an
IMMEDIATE one. We must there SEE Him AS HE IS.


Listen, too, to St. John. “Dearly beloved,” he says, “we are  now  the  sons
of God; and it hath not yet appeared what we shall be. We know that when  He
shall APPEAR, we shall be LIKE TO HIM; for we shall SEE HIM AS  HE  IS.”  (1
John 3:2). Another sublime text! It tells us  that,  because  we  are  God's
adopted children on earth, and heirs to  His  own  riches  in  eternity,  we
shall be made “like to Him” in heaven, in the MANNER in which we shall  know
Him there, for we shall see Him “as  He  is.”  No  created  medium,  however
perfect, could enable us to do that. It demands an  IMMEDIATE  insight  into
His essence. Such must be, therefore, the vision in heaven.


In heaven, then, we shall know God IN THE WAY He knows  Himself.  Does  this
mean that we shall know Him INFINITELY?  No.  Only  an  intellect  which  is
itself infinite can do  that.  And  ours  will  not  cease  to  be  a  human
intellect. It will not know God to the same EXTENT that  He  knows  Himself;
but it will know Him in the same MANNER. Hence, it will still  know  Him  AS
HE IS.


No created intellect could, by its own power, stand the immediate vision  of
God. It would be darkened by the excessive light immeasurably more than  our
eyes are darkened when we  look  directly  at  the  sun.  Hence,  the  human
intellect needs to  be  elevated  and  strengthened  to  bear  the  beatific
vision. This is done by what is called  the  LIGHT  OF  GLORY,  which  is  a
sharing  in  God's  own  intellectual  light,  and   the   consummation   of
sanctifying grace, and the charity that accompanies  it  on  earth.  Of  all
God's wondrous works, it is the  greatest  after  the  Incarnation;  for  it
makes a greater demand on His omnipotence than any of the rest.  It  is  the
supreme witness to His love.


By it God opens  to  the  blessed  the  whole  storehouse  of  His  infinite
knowledge to be shared by them according to the capacity of each. Hence,  no
words can express the perfection of  their  knowledge.  It  is  immeasurably
superior to that proper to the highest angel  God  could  create.  It  gives
them, for instance, intrinsic  evidence  of  the  great  mysteries  that  we
accept on earth by faith: the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Redemption,  and
all the rest. It enables them to see  how  all  God's  attributes  including
those that seem to clash with one another, such as His  justice  and  mercy,
are harmonised and reconciled in His essence, just as the different  colours
of the spectrum are blended into one in the white light  that  comes  to  us
from the sun. At the  same  time,  of  course,  they  have  an  incomparable
knowledge of created things, all the sciences, all the events in which  they
are interested, the condition of their friends wherever these may be  –  all
things, in fact, that they can ever wish to know.


In thus opening up to us God's infinite knowledge  of  Himself  and  of  His
creatures, heaven satisfies perfectly and forever our greatest need as  man,
and so contributes one of the things necessary for  our  complete  HAPPINESS
in eternity.


     (b). Love.


Man has a will as well as an intellect. Hence, his second great need  is  to
LOVE and to BE LOVED.


This, too, is perfectly satisfied in heaven; for there the blessed not  only
KNOW God in the way He knows Himself, but they also LOVE Him in the  way  He
loves Himself; for love always vibrates in harmony with knowledge.  And  He,
of course, returns their love; for the love in heaven is a true  CHARITY,  a
mutual unselfish love, a love of FRIENDSHIP existing  between  God  and  the
soul. There, faith gives place to vision; hope, to possession;  but  charity
remains.


Even on earth it urges us to love God above all else for His own  infinitely
lovable sake, to will that He be known and loved by others, that His  rights
be recognised, and His will be done by all. In heaven, it will do the  same;
but there, on account of the perfection of our knowledge, our love  will  be
far more fervent than it can ever be on  earth.  Moreover,  since  we  shall
then love God in the way He loves Himself, our love will be  above  freedom,
as His is, a love that  can  never  be  lost  nor  even  diminished  in  the
slightest, for sin will be impossible.


True, we shall not love God to the EXTENT that  He  loves  us,  nor  to  the
extent that He is lovable. Only an infinite will can do that. But  we  shall
love Him to the fullest extent of our capacity; hence with a love worthy  of
His infinite goodness.


It will include, of  course,  all  creatures  worthy  of  love.  The  loving
companionship of our dear ones, our  intimate  fellowship  with  angels  and
saints, with Mary our Mother and her Divine Son –  all  this  will  be  ours
forever. Nor will any grief or misunderstanding or separation mar  the  love
of the blessed. Husbands and  wives,  parents  and  children,  brothers  and
sisters, companions and friends who once parted in tears will meet again  in
joy to part no more. For, as St. John says, “God will wipe  away  all  tears
from their eyes; and death shall be no more, nor mourning, nor  crying,  nor
sorrow; for the former things are passed away.” (Apoc. 21:4).  Purgatory  is
suffering, with love. But heaven is love alone.


By thus satisfying perfectly and forever man's profound desire to  love  and
to be loved, heaven will give us the second thing necessary for our  perfect
HAPPINESS in eternity.


     (c). Pleasure.


Since man has a body as well as a soul, his third  great  need  is  that  of
SENSIBLE DELIGHT, the pleasure he derives through his sense faculties.


After the resurrection, our sense KNOWLEDGE will be  perfected  and  refined
so that we shall be able to appreciate to the full the grandeur  and  beauty
of the glorious new universe into which our present one will be  transformed
on the Last Day. Our LOVE, too, of all that is beautiful in nature, in  form
and sound and colour, will be enhanced a thousandfold, and become  a  source
of exquisite sensible delight that can never pass away.


Heaven will thus satisfy to the full every desire  for  pleasure  compatible
with the condition of a glorified body; and so assure us of the  last  thing
necessary for perfect HAPPINESS forever.


2. What Heaven Is.


Now you can see why heaven is called the BEATIFIC VISION. It  is  a  vision,
indeed, one even into the very essence of God. And just because it is  that,
it is one that brings with it BEATITUDE or perfect happiness. We are  happy,
remember, when we have NO DESIRE UNSATlSFIED; and  we  are  perfectly  happy
when we have none unsatisfied FOREVER. By  satisfying  all  our  desires  in
eternity, therefore, heaven must give us complete  happiness.  Moreover,  it
is not a happiness proportionate to MAN as is that enjoyed in Limbo,  but  a
SUPERNATURAL happiness proportionate to the  INFINITE;  for  it  is  a  real
sharing in the happiness proper to GOD.


Heaven, then, is a PLACE and a STATE in which  the  good  angels  and  human
beings who have died in GRACE, KNOW GOD in the way He  knows  Himself,  LOVE
Him in the way He loves Himself, and so share His measureless  HAPPINESS  in
eternity.


3. Its Properties.


     (a). It is Unlosable.


On earth we can commit sin, because God seems to us good from some  aspects,
evil from others, on  account  of  the  self-denial  required  to  keep  His
commandments. In heaven, He is seen to be infinitely good, good  from  every
aspect. Knowing Him in the way He knows Himself,  and  loving  Him  as  thus
known, the blessed can never find the least pretext for leaving Him by  sin.
For them, sin is absolutely impossible, as it is  for  God  Himself.  Hence,
the vision they enjoy can never be lost.


This is why St. Paul can speak of it as “an INCORRUPTIBLE  crown.”  (1  Cor.
9:5). And why St. Peter can say that it is “an  inheritance,  INCORRUPTIBLE,
and UNDEFILED, THAT CAN NEVER FADE.” (1 Pet. 1:4). If it could, the  blessed
could not be perfectly happy, since their happiness would be  always  marred
by the fear of losing it. Heaven could not be heaven if it could ever end.


     (b). It Is Eternal.


On earth, there is continuous time. In  purgatory,  discontinuous  time.  In
heaven, no time at all. Instead, there is eternity. Unlike  God's  eternity,
that of the blessed has a beginning; but, like His, it can have no  end.  It
is a sharing in His, a sharing in the one unchanging moment into  which  the
infinite life of God is concentrated, without past or future, forever.


Thus Scripture assures us that once the Last Judgment has  been  pronounced,
the wicked “shall  go  into  EVERLASTING  punishment;  but  the  just,  into
EVERLASTING life.” (Mat. 25:46). St. Paul, too, reminds us that “what is  at
present momentary and light of our tribulation worketh for us above  measure
an ETERNAL weight of glory” in heaven. (2 Cor. 4:17).


The sharing that the blessed have in God's eternity contributes  greatly  to
their  happiness,  since  it  dispels  completely  the   fear   that   every
intellectual creature can have of ceasing to exist.  It  is  thus  the  very
opposite of the ghastly sense of annihilation that  torments  the  souls  in
hell.


     (c). It is Ever New.


Some think that heaven must grow monotonous after a few million years.  This
is because they think of eternity as a long time.  But  eternity  is  wholly
different from time. It is an  ever-present  instant,  a  “now”  that  never
passes but concentrates in itself the fullness of  unending  life.  Heavenly
joy has therefore a newness that can never fade, since the first  moment  of
it lasts forever. It is like a glorious morning that can never end.


     (d). It Varies For different Persons.


All in heaven have the same object of vision; but all do  not  know  God  to
the same extent. Hence their love also varies,  and  their  happiness.  Thus
Scripture says that when Christ will come to judge us at the  end  of  time,
He will “render to every man according  to  his  WORKS.”  (Mat.  16:27).  As
these will vary with different persons, so will the reward.  St.  Paul  says
the same thing: “Every man shall receive his OWN reward,  according  to  his
OWN labour.” (1 Cor. 3:8). He also warns us that “He that  soweth  sparingly
shall also reap sparingly; he that soweth in blessings shall  also  reap  in
blessings.” (2 Cor. 9:6).


How could it be otherwise? Our reward in heaven  will  be  proportionate  to
the light of glory. This, to the merits we have stored  up,  and  the  grace
and charity in our soul immediately after death. Thus Our  Lady  will  enjoy
an unrivalled insight into God's essence in the beatific vision  on  account
of her incomparable charity. She will be in very truth the Queen of  heaven,
Queen of all angels and of all men.


     (e). Yet Each Will Be Perfectly Happy.


Since everyone in heaven will know, love and enjoy God to  the  FULL  extent
of his CAPACITY, each will be perfectly  happy.  None  will  have  a  single
desire unsatisfied in  eternity.  However,  we  must  not  forget  that  the
desires of the blessed will be wholly regulated  by  God's  will.  They  can
never have any wish contrary to His. This is why, impossible though  it  may
seem to us on earth, their joy will not be marred  by  the  fact  that  some
whom they have loved on earth may  have  deliberately  spurned  God's  mercy
even at the  moment  of  death,  and  buried  themselves  forever  in  hell.
Happiness can exist only with right order.  And  right  order  demands  that
those who deliberately hate and despise God to the end  should  be  excluded
from His presence in eternity.


4. Conclusion.


Such, then, is heaven. “Eternal life” it is often called  in  Scripture.  No
better name could be given it, for it is a real sharing in the life  of  Him
who is Life itself. It is the greatest proof of God's love for  us;  for  in
giving us heaven, He gives us HIMSELF, to be known,  loved  and  enjoyed  in
eternity. After this, though He is infinite, He has nothing left to give.


It is the one reward we must never lose, since to lose it is  to  lose  all,
forever.


Finally, it is our HOME. And in it, Our Lord assures  us,  there  are  “MANY
MANSIONS”, (John 14:2) from the highest to the lowest. How  consoling!  Each
of us can say: “Who knows? Given God's infinite  mercy,  there  may  be  one
even low enough for me.” And, low though it is, it will enable me to  “enter
into the joy of the Lord,” (Mat. 25:21) where “Eye hath  not  seen  nor  ear
heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man  the  things  that  God
hath prepared for those that love Him.” (1 Cor. 2:9).


                                  B. HELL.


l. Origin.


Angels are created spirits not destined to  be  united  substantially  to  a
body. Infinitely inferior to God who alone is self-existing,  they  are  yet
vastly superior to man. Their  number?  Billions.  Unlike  man,  each  is  a
species on his own. They are divided according to their  dignity  into  nine
choirs: the Seraphim, Cherubim and Thrones;  the  Dominations,  Virtues  and
Powers; the Principalities, Archangels and Angels.


At the instant of their creation they were given a  trial  by  God  to  test
their loyalty. Some were true to Him, and were admitted immediately  to  the
beatific vision. Your guardian angel was one of these. Do you ever think  of
congratulating him? Others rebelled against God. They  sinned  mortally  and
were instantly cast into hell. That is how it came into  existence.  It  was
made for the devil and his angels.


2. Scripture and Tradition Concerning Hell.


     (a). CHRIST'S TEACHING.


Our Divine Lord is dreadfully emphatic  and  clear  in  all  His  statements
concerning the reality of hell.


For instance, He demands that we accept His teaching under pain  of  ETERNAL
DAMNATION. After bidding His Apostles to make known His truths to the  whole
world, He says: “He that believeth shall be SAVED;  but  he  that  believeth
not shall be CONDEMNED.” (Mark 16:16). Just as “saved” here means  saved  in
heaven, “condemned” must mean condemned to hell.


Again, listen to His warning against occasions of  sin.  He  says:  “If  thy
hand scandalise thee, cut it off. It  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  LIFE
maimed, than having two hands to go into HELL, into UNQUENCHABLE FIRE:


   “Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.


   “And if thy foot scandalise thee, cut it off. It is better for  thee  to
   enter lame into LIFE EVERLASTING than having two feet to  be  cast  into
   the HELL OF UNQUENCHABLE FIRE:


   “Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.


   “And if thy eye scandalise thee, pluck it out. It  is  better  for  thee
   with one eye to enter the KINGDOM OF GOD, than having  two  eyes  to  be
   cast into the HELL OF FIRE:


   “Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is  not  extinguished.”  (Mark
   9:42-47).


How explicit He is! How insistent! And what a striking  contrast  He  draws
between EVERLASTING LIFE and the HELL OF UNQUENCHABLE FIRE!


In a similar way. He warns us  against  final  impenitence  (Mat.12:32);  He
urges the duty of charity (John 15:6);  and  He  demands  that  we  practise
chastity (Mat. 5:28), all under pain of ETERNAL  PUNISHMENT.  He  tells  us,
too, that heaven is for those who “do His Father's will,” and that  hell  is
for those “that work iniquity.” (Mat. 7:21-23). And how often does  He  tell
the Pharisees that they will be damned if they persist  in  their  hypocrisy
“You serpents,” He says to them, “generation of vipers, how  will  you  flee
from the judgement of hell?” (Mat. 23:33).


Several of His parables, again, end with the condemnation of the  wicked  to
HELL – that of the cockle, for instance; that of the  royal  marriage,  that
of the wise and the foolish virgins, and that of the talents.  Even  in  His
Sermon on the Mount, He refers to hell no fewer than six times.


But the dread reality of hell is brought home to us most,  perhaps,  by  the
graphic description He gives  of  the  Last  Judgement.  There,  as  Supreme
JUDGE, He will say to the blessed: “Come you blessed of My  Father,  possess
you the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world”;  and  to
the wicked: “Depart from Me, you cursed, into EVERLASTING  FIRE,  which  was
prepared for the devil and his angels.” And Scripture adds: “These shall  go
into EVERLASTING punishment; but the  just  into  EVERLASTING  life.”  (Mat.
25:32). Judges never  use  figurative  language  when  passing  a  sentence.
Coming as it does from the lips of  Him  who  is  Truth  Itself,  acting  as
JUDGE, this text should strike fear even into the heart of  a  saint.  Think
of it! Everlasting banishment from God, the Supreme Good, to a  never-ending
prison of fire, made to punish the devil and his angels!


     (b). THE TEACHING OF THE APOSTLES.


The APOSTLES are equally  explicit  and  emphatic  in  their  teaching.  ST.
PETER, for example, tells us that false prophets and  lying  teachers  shall
be punished in hell, as are the rebel angels.  (2  Pet.  2:1-22).  ST.  JUDE
speaks in similar terms of the ungodly who denied Christ. He likens them  to



   “Clouds without water, which are carried about by winds;  trees  of  the
   autumn, unfruitful, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;


   “Raging waves of the sea foaming  out  their  own  confusion,  wandering
   stars to whom the storm of darkness is reserved  FOREVER.”  (Jude  l:12-
   13).


How dreadfully insane their life is! How utterly worthless!  And  their  lot
in eternity? It is, as he says in verse seven, “the  punishment  of  ETERNAL
FIRE,” and a tormenting darkness that can never end.


ST. PAUL has  also  a  great  deal  to  say  about  hell.  Speaking  of  the
persecutors of the Church, for instance, he says  that  they  “shall  suffer
ETERNAL PUNISHMENT in destruction from the face of the Lord,  and  from  the
glory of His power, when He shall come to be glorified in His saints and  to
be made wonderful in all of them who  have  believed.”  (2  Thess.  l:9-10).
This text is  especially  important,  because  it  is  St.  Paul's  INSPIRED
interpretation of Christ's sentence on the Last Day. And it  expresses  most
clearly and explicitly the reality of an everlasting hell. In several  other
texts that could be quoted he does the same.


Faced with these and similar texts from  Scripture,  we  cannot  escape  the
conclusion that hell exists. No artifice of speech or reasonable  method  of
interpreting the New  Testament  can  get  away  from  the  perfectly  clear
meaning of these unmistakable words, especially those uttered by Christ.


     (c). TRADITION.


TRADITION is just  as  clear,  from  the  beginning.  For  the  first  three
centuries, no Christian dared deny the existence  of  hell.  In  the  fourth
century a few heretics called in question its eternity.[1] Their  error  was
instantly condemned by the Church. Thus, in the ATHANASIAN  Creed  drawn  up
about this time, we read: “They that have  done  good  shall  go  into  LIFE
EVERLASTING; and they that have done evil, into EVERLASTING  FIRE.  This  is
the Catholic faith which, unless a man believe  faithfully  and  firmly,  he
cannot be saved.” Later, in the fourteenth century, the teaching that  those
who die in mortal sin do not go to hell till the last day was  condemned  by
Pope Benedict XII, who declared that such persons  go  to  hell  immediately
after death.  Like  Scripture,  therefore,  Tradition  leaves  no  loop-hole
whatever for the denial of hell and its eternity.


We accept its existence, then,  as  an  article  of  divine  faith,  on  the
AUTHORITY OF GOD revealing it. And we are certain that He has  revealed  it,
because the CHURCH assures us INFALLIBLY that He has.


3. Its Sufferings.


     (a). THE PAIN OF LOSS.


This is the irreparable loss of the BEATIFIC VISION. It is by far the  worst
punishment of the damned. Without it, hell would not  be  hell.  It  is  its
very essence.


On earth we are without the beatific vision. Yet its lack does not cause  us
suffering. Why should it do so after death?  To  understand  this,  we  must
distinguish between the mere ABSENCE of a good, and  the  DEPRIVATION  of  a
good. In the former case, the good is not DUE to us. In  the  latter  it  is
DUE. We OUGHT have it. The former  does  not  cause  suffering.  The  latter
does. Thus no man is saddened by the fact that he has not wings,  or  scores
of legs. These are in no way DUE to him. He is not a bird  or  a  centipede.
But every man is saddened by the loss of his sight  or  hearing.  These  are
DUE to him. As man, he OUGHT have them.  Apply  this  now  to  the  beatific
vision. On earth, its lack is a mere ABSENCE. No one  OUGHT  have  it  here,
since it is reserved for eternity. After death, however, a soul  OUGHT  have
it, given our elevation to the supernatural order. Its lack is no  longer  a
mere absence. It is the DEPRIVATION of a good infinitely more precious  than
sight or hearing, since it is the SUPREME GOOD, the Good beyond compare.


Now, consider this. The more we appreciate the  greatness  of  the  good  we
have lost, and the more our nature yearns for it,  the  more  suffering  its
deprivation will bring to us. But the souls in  hell  realise  most  clearly
that the good of which they are deprived through  their  own  fault  is  the
INFINITE GOOD, and their last end. Nor can they forget their loss  even  for
a moment by turning to lesser goods, as we can on earth; for  there  are  no
lesser goods in hell to which they can turn. At the  same  time  they  yearn
for God with their whole being, because the  natural  desire  of  the  human
will to love God more than self remains. Yet they are  compelled  to  loathe
and hate Him forever, because of the perversity  of  their  will  which  has
been made permanent by death.


The pain of loss, therefore, is made up of several torments. In it there  is
an immense SADNESS, proportionate to the infinite good  of  which  they  are
deprived. Coupled with this is a ghastly  LONELINESS  felt  by  a  spiritual
being cast forth forever from  companionship  with  God,  without  a  single
created good to which it  can  turn  for  consolation.  Then,  there  is  an
unbearable CONTRADICTION or war within the soul itself, due to  its  natural
inclination to love God above all else, and its self-imposed hatred  of  Him
forever. Finally, there is an appalling sense of ANNIHILATION,  due  to  the
soul's banishment by God. Just as Our Saviour's words,  “Come  ye  blessed,”
attract the soul to Himself with an immeasurable attraction,  so,  too,  His
words, “Depart from Me, you cursed,” thrust the  damned  soul  from  Him  on
whom it depends every instant for its existence.  It  thus  fills  the  soul
with a horrifying sense of annihilation, a sort  of  constant  sinking  into
nothingness. Our Saviour seems to have felt something of this at the  moment
He was redeeming us; and it wrung from His anguished soul the  unforgettable
cry: “My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” It is the worst  suffering
in the pain of loss, because it is directly opposed to the  very  nature  of
the soul itself as a spiritual being, made for eternity.


     (b). DESPAIR.


Even on earth despair can be a ghastly thing. It can  completely  wreck  our
happiness. It can unhinge the mind. It can drive a man to suicide.  But  the
despair of the damned is immeasurably worse, since it is concerned  with  an
infinite good, lost eternally. They know that for them there is no  hope  of
any happiness, but only suffering and misery forever.


     (c). REMORSE.


This is an intense regret caused by the thought that they  could  so  easily
have saved their souls, had they taken the means given by Christ. It is  the
“worm that dieth not” so often mentioned in Scripture. In the Old  Testament
it is graphically described by the  Book  of  Wisdom  in  which  the  author
portrays the damned comparing their lot with that of the saved.

   “Saying within themselves, repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit:
   These are they whom we had some time in derision, and for a  parable  of
   reproach.
   “We fools esteemed their life madness, and their end without honour.
   “Behold how they are numbered amongst the children of God, and their lot
   is amongst the saints.
   “Therefore, we have erred from the  way  of  truth,  and  the  light  of
   justice hath not shined unto us, and the sun of understanding  hath  not
   risen upon us.
   “We wearied ourselves in the way of iniquity and destruction,  and  have
   walked through the hard way; but the way of the Lord we have not known.
   “What hath pride profited us? Or what advantage  hath  the  boasting  of
   riches brought us?
   “All these things are passed away like a shadow...
   “Such things as these the sinners said in hell.” (Wisd. 5:3-14).

How vividly this passage brings home to us the remorse of  the  damned;  the
fleetingness of life; the horror of realising at death that we have  nothing
to take with us into eternity; the complete absence of any  good  to  solace
the lost; the madness of a life of sin.


Notice that the souls in hell are said to REPENT. This does  not  mean  that
they have true CONTRITION for their sins. They are sorry  for  sin,  indeed,
but not precisely as SIN, as an offence against GOD, but solely as  a  CAUSE
OF THEIR MISERY. It is the PUNISHMENT they regret,  not  the  sin,  as  sin.
There is no resolution of amendment here. On  the  contrary,  through  their
own fault, their  will  is  fixed  in  evil  forever.  Hence,  this  is  not
contrition, but only a galling REMORSE, as unavailing as it  is  bitter  and
everlasting.


     (d) FIRE.


Recall Christ's words: “Depart from me, you cursed, into  everlasting  fire,
which was prepared for the devil and  his  angels.”  Here  the  word  “fire”
cannot be taken as a metaphor for anguish of soul.  It  must  mean  material
fire. Why? In the first place, it is the  SENTENCE  OF  A  JUDGE,  the  most
momentous that can ever be passed on man. But no judge delivers  a  sentence
in figurative language. What would you think of a judge delivering  a  death
sentence: “You shall be hanged by the neck till  you  are  dead,”  and  then
adding: “But, of course, I mean this only metaphorically”? Secondly,  Christ
here BANISHES the lost souls to a PLACE. “Depart from Me,” He  says.  But  a
place is a MATERIAL thing. Hence quite distinct from a spiritual thing  such
as anguish of soul. Thirdly, the fire here is  that  which  was  created  to
punish the devil and his angels, centuries before any human souls  can  have
been sent to it. It must therefore be  something  DISTINCT  from  them,  not
just a  spiritual  experience  that  starts  at  the  moment  of  damnation.
Moreover, it is always given as a CAUSE of their sufferings, never as  these
sufferings themselves. Lastly, this fire will torment the bodies as well  as
the souls of the damned, after the resurrection; for Christ says: “Fear  not
them that kill the body and are not able to kill the soul; but  rather  fear
him that can destroy BOTH SOUL AND BODY in hell.”  (Mat.  10:28).  It  must,
therefore, be true,  material  fire,  and  not  just  a  figurative  way  of
expressing the mental  sufferings  of  the  souls  in  hell.  And  the  same
interpretation must be given this word in the numerous other texts in  which
it occurs. This is why we accept the existence of material fire in hell.


Though real fire, it differs in many ways from the fire we  know  on  earth.
Ours  is  fed  by  what  it  burns;  it,  by  God's  justice.  Ours  can  be
extinguished; it is  eternal.  Ours  is  given  as  a  benefit;  it,  as  an
instrument of suffering. Ours consumes its victim; it does not.  Ours  gives
light; it is compatible with an intolerable darkness. And so on.


How can it torment something  spiritual?  As  a  material  thing,  fire  can
certainly enable a spirit to be in a PLACE, just as a room does if an  angel
starts to act in it. Used as an INSTRUMENT by GOD, it can do  far  more.  It
can BIND, DETAIN, IMPRISON a spirit in a place,  preventing  it  from  going
elsewhere, thus PARALYSING, as it were, its spiritual activities,  hindering
it unceasingly from doing its own will. And this must obviously be a  source
of great suffering to a spirit, a sort of crucifixion of soul;  and  at  the
same time a most bitter and galling HUMILIATION, since a  spirit  should  by
its very nature dominate matter, and not be dominated by it. If God can  use
water to cause grace, as in baptism, or to cure a  cancer,  as  at  Lourdes,
surely He can use fire to torment souls. After the resurrection, of  course,
this fire  will  torment  also  the  bodies  of  the  damned,  without  ever
consuming them, just as the fire seen by Moses in the  burning  bush  really
burnt there without destroying it. Anyway,  our  task  in  life  is  not  to
understand how fire can cause suffering to a spiritual thing,  but  to  live
in such a way that we shall avoid its torments in eternity.


4. The Eternity of Hell.


Today some Protestants deny the eternity of hell by saying  that  the  souls
there will ultimately be admitted to heaven. In doing this, they are  really
changing hell to PURGATORY, though they profess to abhor the  very  name  of
such a place. Moreover, they are going against the perfectly clear and  very
insistent testimony of Scripture, though they claim to base  their  religion
on the Bible and on it alone. For us, however, there can be no  uncertainty.
The Church has infallibly  defined  that  hell  is  eternal.  Its  eternity,
therefore, as well as its existence we accept on the authority of God.  This
belief does  not  terrify  us,  any  more  than  a  law-abiding  citizen  is
terrified by knowing that there are jails in Australia. But it does help  us
to keep from sin. Hell has saved countless souls.


In this matter, we must never forget that every human being  will  be  happy
in eternity, unless he deliberately chooses to be otherwise.  An  unbaptised
child dying before coming to the use of reason,  will  enjoy  the  happiness
proper to man, forever in Limbo. All who come to the  use  of  reason,  must
freely CHOOSE their lot beyond the grave. God gives  them  sufficient  grace
to save their souls. If they go to hell, it  is  solely  through  their  own
fault. They deliberately reject the grace that would otherwise save them.


During our life, God  exercises  His  mercy  towards  us  in  a  wonderfully
generous way. How infinitely merciful Christ was even to the worst  sinners,
who showed the least signs of repentance. Think of Mary  Magdalen,  and  the
repentant thief! However, if a sinner INSISTS on spurning God's mercy,  even
at the moment of death, God cannot save him. Any attempt to do so would  rob
the man of his free will; hence, frustrate itself.


Realise now what happens at death, and you will see  why  hell  is  eternal.
The LAST choice made by a human being BEFORE the moment of death  DETERMINES
what his lot will be: HEAVEN or HELL. It chooses one  or  the  other.  Then,
the FIRST act of the will AFTER death makes this  choice  EVERLASTING.  Why?
Because a separated soul acts in the way an angel does. In making a  choice,
it makes it forever, since it makes it with all the  intellectual  light  it
can ever have to influence its judgement.


This is why death is such a momentous  event  for  each  of  us.  The  first
instant after it ETERNALISES the choice made  freely  by  the  will  in  the
instant that preceded it. Hence, it makes it  impossible  for  God  ever  to
exercise His mercy towards the damned. Their will is fixed in sin.  It  must
reject forever any mercy that God might otherwise see fit to extend  to  it.
It is immutably fixed in its own self-chosen perversity. It can never  learn
wisdom from its sufferings. It can never repent with true contrition. It  is
a prey to an unavailing remorse, and to a despair that can know no  end.  It
has deliberately committed itself to hate God as its Punisher, forever.


Even during our life, a formal mortal sin is an IRREVOCABLE  choice.  In  it
we choose ourselves instead of God, as our LAST END. If we happen to  change
our will after such a sin, the change is due, not to the  natural  power  of
our will alone, but to God's GRACE, which first inspires fear, then  regret,
then hope, then a desire of forgiveness, and  finally  true  contrition  and
love. Every act of perfect contrition  made  after  mortal  sin,  and  every
fruitful absolution given in confession is therefore a striking  witness  to
the goodness and mercy of God. In this life, then, the choice  of  our  will
in sinning is not ABSOLUTELY irrevocable, thanks to God's grace.  But  death
makes it so. Hence there can be no further  exercises  of  His  mercy  after
death, any more than there could be for the rebel angels who,  at  the  very
instant of their sin, were cast into hell for ever.


5. Lessons.


God's revelation of heaven and hell ought to bring home to  us  the  dignity
and the depth of the human soul, by showing  its  limitless  capacity  as  a
spiritual being for happiness and for misery in  eternity.  It  should  also
move us to tears of gratitude to His Divine Son who became man, in order  to
save us from hell, and enable us again to go to heaven. It  should  fill  us
with a loathing for mortal sin, since by it alone can we  rob  ourselves  of
the beatific vision, and put ourselves in hell. It should  make  us  realise
the value of the present moment, since in it we can turn from  sin,  or,  if
we are in grace already, store up further  merit  for  eternity.  It  should
cause us to shun wordliness and superficiality, since these can blind us  to
the dread realities that wait for us beyond the grave.  It  should  fill  us
with zeal for the salvation of others. In a word, it should  inspire  us  to
live our Christian life as fully as we possibly can,  in  imitation  of  Our
Lord and His Immaculate Mother. Time  is  short;  yet,  on  it  depends  our
eternity.





6. Practical Conclusions.


1.   I should hate mortal sin above every other evil; and avoid as far as  I
  can all occasions of sin.


2.   I should make an act of  perfect  contrition  immediately,  and  go  to
  confession as soon as I can if I ever fall into mortal sin.


3.   I should do my best to increase good habits daily,  by  practising  all
  the virtues.


4.   I should be deeply devoted to Our Lady, since this is  a  guarantee  of
  salvation.


5.   I should never forget Our Lord's words: “What shall it profit a man  if
  he gain the whole world, and suffer the loss of his soul?”




                                   SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION.
OUR LAST END:
(a).     To promote God's glory in eternity.
(b).     Our choice of heaven or hell.
                                 (A) HEAVEN.
1. Man's Greatest Needs.
(a).     Knowledge. How the blessed know God in heaven.
(b).     Love. How they love Him in heaven.
(c).     Pleasure. Sensible delights, after the resurrection.
2. What Heaven Is.
 (a).    Why called the beatific vision.
 (b).    Its definition.

3. Its Properties.
 (a).    It is unlosable.
 (b).    It is eternal.
 (c).    It is ever new.
 (d).    It varies for different persons.
 (e).    Yet each is perfectly happy.
4. Conclusion.
 (a).    Eternal life.
 (b).    The one thing we must never lose.
 (c).    Our home in eternity.
                                  (B) HELL.
l. Its Origin.
 (a).    The angels.
 (b).    Their fall.
2. Scripture And Tradition.
 (a).    Christ's Teaching.
 (b).    The Teaching of the Apostles.
 (c).    Tradition.
3. Its Sufferings.
 (a).    The pain of loss.
 (b).    Despair.
 (c).    Remorse.
 (d).    Fire.
4. Its Eternity.
 (a).    Definition of the Church.
 (b).    Why hell is eternal.
 (c).    Importance of death.
5. Lessons.
 (a).    Dignity and depth of the soul.
 (b).    Gratitude for the Incarnation.
 (c).    Hatred of sin.
 (d).    Value of the present moment.
 (e).    Danger of worldliness and superficiality.
 (f).    Zeal for souls.
 (g).    Imitation of Christ and Our Lady.
6. Practical Conclusions.



                                  EXERCISES

(A). Fill in the blanks and cross out wrong alternatives in the following  :
–
l. Our Last end is to promote (....)  in  eternity.  2.  We  shall  do  this
either in (....) or in (....) according to our choice. 3. Man's first  great
need is (....).  4.  In  heaven  God's  essence  is  known  by  the  blessed
(mediately) (immediately). 5. St. Paul says: “But then I shall know even  as
(....).” 6. St. John says that in heaven we shall see God “even as  (....).”
7. Only by the help of the (....) will our intellect be able  to  stand  the
beatific vision. 8. Man's second great need is (....). 9. The  blessed  know
and love God to the full extent to which He is knowable and lovable.  (True)
(False). 10. They know Him in the way He knows Himself, and  they  love  Him
in the way He loves Himself. (True) (False). 11.  They  know  and  love  Him
infinitely. (True) (False). 12. Sharing His knowledge and  love,  they  must
share also His (....). 13. A  being  is  perfectly  happy  when  it  has  no
desires (....) forever. 14. All our desires for sensible  delights  will  be
fully satisfied in heaven  after  (....).  15.  The  beatific  vision  (can)
(cannot) be lost by those in heaven. 16. Heaven (is) (is not)  eternal.  17.
Some souls will be happier than others in heaven. (True)  (False).  18.  The
degree of happiness will depend on (....). 19. Christ will invite  even  the
least of the blessed to “enter the joy  of  (....).”  20.  Heaven  is  often
called “eternal (....).” 21. Hell was  first  made  to  punish  (....).  22.
Christ threatened with (....) those who refused to accept  His  truths.  23.
On the Last Day, He will  say  to  the  lost:  “(....).”  24.  This  is  the
sentence of  a  (....);  hence  its  words  must  be  taken  in  a  (proper)
(figurative) sense. 25. The main suffering in hell is the (....). 26. It  is
made up of  four  different  sufferings,  namely  (....),   (....),  (....),
(.....). 27. Instead of hope, there is (....) in hell.  28.  The  regret  of
the lost concerning sin is called (....), it (is) (is not) true  contrition.
29. We (do) (do not) admit the presence of material fire in hell. 30.  Every
material thing can enable a spirit to be in a (....). 31.  It  can  imprison
it there, if used as God's (....). 32. The Church (has)  (has  not)  defined
that hell is eternal. 33. A soul in hell (would) (would not) come out if  it
were allowed to do so. 34. In every mortal sin we choose  ourselves  instead
of God as our (....). 35. As far as our natural power goes, this  choice  is
(....). 36. If we repent, it is due to (....). 37. God (can)  (cannot)  give
the grace of repentance to a soul in hell. 38. Every  human  being  must  be
happy in eternity unless he deliberately chooses  to  be  otherwise.  (True)
(False). 39. No one can go to hell except  through  his  own  fault.  (True)
(False). 40. Christ says: “What doth it profit a man if he gain (....),  and
suffer the loss (....).”

(B) Answer each of the following as fully as you can: –
1.   What is our Last End? How does God respect our freedom in its regard?
2.   What are man's three great needs? How is each satisfied in heaven?
3.   Give five properties of the beatific vision.
4.   Why is heaven called: (a) the beatific vision; (b) Eternal life?
5.   How did hell originate? How do you define it? Why do we believe in it?
6.   Explain (a) the pain of loss; (b) the despair;  (c)  the  remorse;  (d)
  the fire in hell.
7.   Show why hell must be eternal.
8.   What lessons can be drawn from God's revelation of heaven and of hell?
-----------------------
[1] Editor’s note: Orgin did during the 3rd Century and Didymus the Blind
is in the 4th Century.

