


                                 Chapter 55


                            THE END OF THE WORLD


                             (A) ITS DESTRUCTION


1. The Fact.


God assures us that the world will end. When? On the Last Day,  when  Christ
will come again as Judge of all mankind. And when will  this  be?  When  the
Church, His Mystical Body, has completed  Her  work  of  saving  souls.  The
year? We do not know. Not even the century.


HOW will it end? Scripture speaks of a mighty  catastrophe,  in  which  fire
will play a big part, St. Peter, for instance says:


“The Day of the Lord shall come as a thief, in which the heavens shall  pass
away with great violence, and the elements shall be melted  with  heat,  and
the earth and the works that are in it shall be burnt up.”  (2  Pet.  3:10).
St. John was given a pre-view of the end. Here is something of what he  saw:
“Behold, there  was  a  great  earthquake;  and  the  sun  became  black  as
sackcloth of hair, and the whole moon became as blood.


“The stars from heaven fell upon the  earth,  as  the  figtree  casteth  its
green figs, when it is shaken by a great wind.


“And the heavens departed as a book folded up; and every  mountain  and  the
islands were moved out of their places.” (Apoc. 6:12-15).


Scripture has, of course, many other things to say  about  the  end  of  the
world, with its dreadful happenings on the earth, at sea, and in the sky.


It speaks of it, too, as “a cruel day, full of  indignation,  of  wrath  and
fury,” a day of “great tribulation such as hath not been from the  beginning
of the world,” a day especially of terror in which  men  will  “wither  away
with fear,” and call on the “rocks and the mountains to fall upon  them  and
hide them” from the face of  the  Lord,  whom  they  fear  more  than  death
itself.


Will the world be annihilated? No. Several times Scripture assures  us  that
from its ruins there will be fashioned “a new heavens and a new earth,”  one
in keeping with the glorified condition of the bodies of  the  saved,  after
the general resurrection from the dead.


2. Signs of The End.


     (a). THE GOSPEL PREACHED TO ALL.


St. Matthew says that the Gospel “shall be preached in the whole world,  for
a testimony to ALL nations; and then shall  the  CONSUMMATION  come.”  (Mat.
24:14).


     (b). THE COMING OF ANTI-CHRIST.


Opposition to Our Lord will be greatly increased towards the  end.  It  will
reach its climax in ANTI-CHRIST, whom Scripture depicts, not as  a  movement
such as Communism, but  as  a  PERSON.  It  says  that  he  will  have  many
precursors, and many associates. St. Paul speaks of him as  the  wicked  one
“whose coming is according to the working of Satan, in all power  and  signs
and lying wonders, and in all seduction of iniquity  to  them  that  perish,
because they RECEIVE NOT THE LOVE OF THE TRUTH, that they might  be  saved.”
(Thess. 2:9-10). Many will fall away from the faith as a result.


     (c). THE RETURN OF ELIAS.


Malachias foretells the return of Elias “before the coming of the great  and
dreadful Day of the  Lord.”  (Mal.  4:5).  St.  Matthew  also  mentions  his
coming. (Mat. 17:10). His mission? To convert the Jews. It seems, too,  that
Henoch will assist him in this. (Eccli. 44:16).


     (d). THE CONVERSION OF THE JEWS.


St. Paul mentions this. (Rom. 11:25). How many will  have  to  be  converted
before their turning to Christ is a sign of the end? We do not know.


Since we do not know how long the end will take to come after any  of  these
signs, Our Lord's words remain true: “Of that day and hour no  man  knoweth,
no, not the angels of heaven, but the Father alone.” (Mat. 24:36).  However,
for each of us, it is true to say that the end of the  world  comes  at  the
moment of DEATH, since we can neither merit nor demerit after that.











                            (B) THE RESURRECTION


1. What It Is.


At death, the SUBSTANTIAL union  of  body  and  soul  is  broken.  They  are
separated. The soul goes on living, but the body returns to dust.  Now,  the
RESURRECTION is the opposite. In it, soul and body are united  SUBSTANTIALLY
again, to form the same human being as existed  previously.  And  this  time
the union is indissoluble. It will last forever.


The Fourth LATERAN Council, held in 1215, tells us that Christ will come  at
the end of time to judge the good and the bad, “ALL of whom will  rise  with
their OWN PROPER bodies, WHICH THEY NOW  BEAR,  so  that  they  may  receive
according to their deeds.” Notice the words emphasised.


Why “our own proper bodies” which we “now bear”? Why not  just  a  body?  In
the first place, the word “resurrection” itself demands that the  matter  in
our risen body be that which at some time or other formed part of  our  body
on earth. Surely only that can be said to “rise again” which once fell.


Moreover, the body is restored in order that it  may  enjoy  the  reward  or
suffer the punishment due to ITS co-operation with the soul. So it  must  be
the SAME body as the one we have had during life.


Lastly, the soul is made THIS soul through  the  relation  it  has  to  THIS
matter to which it is united. After death, it retains this  relation.  Hence
in the resurrection, it must be united again to THIS matter rather  than  to
another to which it will have no relation whatever. Each of us must  be  the
SAME person, the SAME human being, as he or she was when on earth.


It is obviously not necessary that the soul be  united  to  ALL  the  matter
that will have been in our body during  our  life  time,  since  it  changes
unceasingly. But it does seem that it must be united to SOME of  it,  if  we
are to rise, as the Council puts it, with our own proper  bodies,  the  ones
we now bear.


The body given us on the Last Day will have no defects whatever. St.  Thomas
thinks that all will be in the full vigour  of  life  –  about  the  age  of
thirty. But each will have the characteristics which he or  she  had  during
life, so that each will be easily recognised by the others.








2. Christ's Resurrection.


     (a). CHRIST RAISED THE DEAD TO LIFE.


To make it easier for us to believe in His  and  in  our  own  resurrection,
Christ raised the dead to life. Scripture  mentions  three  cases:  that  of
Jairus's little daughter, who had just died; that of the widow's son,  whose
body was being carried to  burial;  and  that  of  Lazarus  whose  body  had
already been buried several days. Recall Martha's warning to Christ:  “Lord,
by this time he stinketh.” (John. 11:39). No doubt possible  concerning  the
reality of this death!


     (b). CHRIST FORETOLD HIS OWN RESURRECTION.


“Destroy this temple,” He said, referring to His Body, “and in three days  I
will raise it up.” (John 2:10). And when He spoke of His coming  Passion  in
which He would be “mocked and scourged  and  crucified,”  he  said  that  He
would “rise again on the third day.” (Mat. 20:19).


     (c). CHRIST ROSE FROM THE DEAD.


All the Evangelists attest this at great length.  ST.  MARK  devotes  almost
all of his last chapter to it. His account is brief, yet  so  complete  that
the Church uses it as the Gospel for Easter Sunday. Read  it,  and  see  for
yourself the wealth of detail it crams into so small a  space.  ST.  MATTHEW
has all that St. Mark has; but  he  adds  other  details  such  as  Christ's
commission to His Apostles “to raise the dead.” (Mat. 10:8).


As a doctor, ST. LUKE was especially interested  in  Christ's  resurrection.
He not merely testifies to its truth, but  also  gives  a  sort  of  medical
diagnosis of Our Saviour's risen Body.  He  notes,  for  instance,  Christ's
invitation to the Apostles: “See My hands and feet, that  it  is  I  Myself;
handle and see. For a spirit hath not flesh and bones,  as  you  see  Me  to
have.” (Luke 24:29). St. Luke also thinks it  worthy  of  mention  that  the
risen Christ ate the fish and the honey which His Apostles offered  to  Him.
(Luke 24:22).


In addition to the main account of Christ's resurrection, ST. JOHN  supplies
us with some details not mentioned by the others.  Having  reclined  on  Our
Saviour's bosom at the Last Supper, he could not forget to record the  wound
made in that Heart after death. Nor  could  he  omit  to  mention  that  the
worthy reception of the Eucharist gives us a title to special glory  in  our
own resurrection from the dead.


The APOSTLES laid special stress on the resurrection of Christ.  ST.  PETER,
for example, in his first defence of the Church  before  the  Jewish  people
said: “But the Author of Life you killed, whom God raised  from  the  dead.”
(Acts 3:15). He repeated the same doctrine before the Jewish priests.  (Acts
4:10). Addressing the Gentiles, he mentions Christ, “whom  they  (the  Jews)
killed, hanging Him upon a tree. Him God raised up the third day,  and  gave
Him to be manifest... to witnesses pre-ordained by God, even to us  who  did
eat and drink with Him after He rose again from the dead.” (Acts 10:39-43).


Preaching at Antioch, St. Paul follows the same line as St. Peter. He  gives
Christ's resurrection as a reason for accepting Christianity. (Acts  13:31).
He does the same when speaking to the philosophers at Athens, some  of  whom
“mocked,” but others more polite said, “We shall hear thee again  concerning
this matter.” (Acts 17:25). It was the dispute  between  the  Pharisees  and
the Sadducees about the resurrection that finally sent him as a prisoner  to
Rome. There his conviction that Christ's resurrection is the  cause  of  our
own found its expression in the Epistles he wrote from his prison, while  he
was waiting for trial and perhaps death.


Christ's resurrection is thus attested so clearly and forcibly  in  the  New
Testament that no one can have even a semblance of a reason for doubting  or
denying it. And TRADITION is  just  as  strong.  So  we  accept  it  on  the
authority of God who makes it known to us. He  did  this  through  an  angel
whom He sent specially from heaven  for  the  purpose.  Recall  the  angel's
words to Mary Magdalen: “You seek Jesus who was crucified. He is  not  here.
He is RISEN, as He said. Come and see the place where the  Lord  was  laid.”
And he showed her the empty sepulchre. (Mat. 28:6).


3. The General Resurrection.


CHRIST clearly taught this. The  fifth  Chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel  is
nothing more than His sermon on the General Resurrection.  In  it  He  says:
“Amen, amen I say to you... the hour cometh wherein  all  that  are  in  the
graves will hear the voice of the Son of God. And they that have  done  good
things shall come forth unto the resurrection of life; but  they  that  have
done evil, unto the resurrection of judgement.” (John 5:29).


The APOSTLES, too,  mention  the  resurrection  repeatedly.  St.  Paul,  for
instance, devotes to it the whole of  Chapter  15  in  his  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians, where he gives five reasons why we must all rise at the end  of
the world. In his Epistle to the Romans, he adds another. (Roms. 8:11).


TRADITION is equally emphatic. The Didache, the  writings  of  men  such  as
Clement  of  Rome,  Polycarp,  Aristides,  Tatian,  Athanagoras,   Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, Ephrem, Ambrose and Augustine, and  early
Creeds such as the Apostles', the Nicene and the Athanasian – all  give  the
general resurrection as a truth of the Catholic faith. So we must accept  it
as such on the authority of God who has revealed it.





4. Features of a Glorified Body.


Scripture states that ALL the dead will rise, the bad as well as  the  good,
and all together at the same instant, “in a moment, in the twinkling  of  an
eye, at the last trumpet,” as St. Paul puts it. It also tells  us  that  the
bodies of the saved will be supernaturally GLORIFIED, whereas those  of  the
lost will not.


In heaven the bodies of the just will not cease to  be  MATERIAL.  But  they
will be SPIRITUALISED, made more  like  a  SPIRIT,  refined  in  a  wondrous
manner, so that they may be a help rather  than  a  hindrance  to  the  full
activity and enjoyment of the soul. God will  endow  them  with  these  four
qualities:–


     (a). SUBTLETY.


At present our bodies are very dependent on SPACE. This  dependence  enables
them to do three things: to be in a PLACE, to RESIST other bodies and to  BE
RESISTED by them. The first two cannot be taken from  them.  But  the  third
can. It was, in Our Lord, whose  risen  Body  was  able  to  pass  instantly
through a closed door, as when He became present to  His  Apostles  in  this
amazing way, though they could at the same time see His Body  and  touch  it
with their hands. It will be the same for our own  bodies  in  heaven.  This
power of being able to penetrate material things with the  utmost  ease,  in
somewhat the same way as radio waves can pass through  a  wall  at  present,
will obviously be a great help  to  the  perfect  liberty  of  our  soul  in
eternity. It is called the gift of SUBTLETY, and it is meant to  remedy  the
CRASSNESS or GROSSNESS which is a feature of our bodies here on earth.


     (b). IMPASSIBILITY.


In our present life our bodies are PASSIBLE. They can be  wounded,  crushed,
afflicted with many diseases,  decomposed.  In  heaven  all  these  will  be
impossible, thanks to the gift of IMPASSIBILITY  which  will  make  them  as
immune from physical harm as the soul is by  its  very  nature.  Never  will
they be a source of suffering to it, as they now are on earth.


     (c). AGILITY.


On earth our bodies greatly hinder the movement  of  our  soul.  It  can  be
present in its substance only where our body also is. Nor can we  shift  our
body speedily from place to place, unless we  put  it  into  something  else
that shifts – a jet fighter, for example. In  heaven,  however,  our  bodies
will no longer hinder our soul in its movement. They  will  be  able  to  go
from one place to another with the speed of thought, on account of the  gift
of AGILITY which will do away with the galling INERTNESS that we  experience
in the present life. What a happy freedom will ours be in heaven!


     (d). CLARITY.


This  is  the  supernatural  LIGHT  that  will  shine  forth  with  wondrous
splendour from a glorified body, so that it may be a fit companion  for  its
glorified soul. Just as the soul will be made resplendent with the LIGHT  OF
GLORY which is a real sharing in God's own light; so, too, the body will  be
beautified by its own proper supernatural light, like that which shone  from
Our Saviour's Body during the transfiguration on the mount.


St. Paul has in mind these gifts when he writes of our bodies:

   “It is sown (i.e. buried) in corruption; it shall rise in incorruption.
   It is sown in dishonour; it shall rise in glory.
   It is sown in weakness; it shall rise in power.
   It is a natural body; it shall rise a spiritual body.”  (1  Cor.  15:42-
   44).

They manifest the absolute triumph of Christ over death. No  wonder,  then,
that St. Paul, contemplating their ineffable splendour, is  forced  to  cry
out exultingly:


“Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy victory? O  death,
where is thy sting?” (1 Cor. 15:54-55).


Needless to say, the bodies of the lost will have none of them.  Instead  of
being filled with a supernatural light which is  a  sharing  in  God's  very
own, they will be always in darkness, “salted with fire,”  as  Scripture  so
dreadfully expresses it. Instead of enjoying the  wondrous  liberty  of  the
children of God, they  will  know  only  a  degrading  slavery,  a  complete
shackling of liberty, an imprisonment that can never end.


                           (C) THE LAST JUDGEMENT


l. Its Nature And Purpose.


The Last Judgement is necessary for us, not inasmuch as we are  individuals,
but inasmuch as we are members of the human race. It is  necessary  also  in
order that God may justify His ways to men.  On  earth  we  cannot  hope  to
understand the wisdom of His Providence: why He gives such favours to  some,
and so few to others; why He permits this or that evil; sends this  or  that
trial, and so on. At the Last Judgement He  will  make  His  wisdom,  mercy,
goodness and justice clear to all. That is why it is so  often  referred  to
in Scriptures as “The  Day  of  the  Lord.”  It  will  put  an  end  to  all
reasonable grumbling about Providence, for ever.


Instantly  after  the  resurrection,  all  human  beings  will  be  gathered
together for the Judgement. Christ, as Man, will be  the  Judge.  All,  even
the lost and children destined for Limbo, will see Him in His  majesty;  but
only the saved will have an insight into His Divinity.


By a supernatural light, like that given  in  the  first  judgement  at  the
moment of death, every person present will see most clearly  the  helps  and
graces God has given to each of the others; and how each has co-operated  or
failed to co-operate with them. Every thought, word, deed and omission  will
be made public to all: “But I say to you,” Our Lord warned us,  “that  every
idle word that men shall speak, they shall render an account of  it  in  the
day of judgement.” (Mat. 12:36). And again: “For there  is  NOTHING  covered
that shall not be revealed; nor hidden  that  shall  not  be  known.”  (Luke
12:2). Even sins that have been forgiven? Yes. But these will  be  a  source
of glory rather than of confusion to the just, because of their repentance.


Scripture has, of course, a great deal to  say  about  the  Last  Judgement.
Read, for instance, the graphic description given by Our Lord Himself  (Mat.
25:31-46), in which He mentions the momentous sentence that He  will  utter;
and in which He brings home to  us  the  value  of  true  charity  exercised
towards the poor. “As long as you did it to one of these My least  brethren,
you did it to Me.” (Mat. 25:40). Scores of  other  texts  stress  especially
the dreadful aspect of the Day of Judgement. They  should  make  us  realise
that “The fear of the Lord is the beginning  of  wisdom,”  as  the  psalmist
says (Ps. 110:10), and that “It is a  fearful  thing,  (for  an  unrepentant
sinner) to fall into the hands of the living God.” (Heb. 10:31).


2. The Need To Be Ever Ready For It.


Time and again in Scripture God warns us as a loving  Father  to  be  always
ready for the Judgement.


“Watch ye, therefore, praying at all times that you may be accounted  worthy
to escape all these things that are to come, and stand  before  the  Son  of
Man. (Luke 21:36).


“Be prudent, therefore, and watch in prayers.” (1 Cor. 4:7).


“Dearly beloved, be diligent that you may be found before Him unspotted  and
blameless in peace.” (2 Pet. 3:14).


“Now, little children, abide in Him, that when He shall appear, we may  have
confidence and not be confounded by Him at His Coming.” (1 John 2:28).


“Abide in Him.” All wisdom is summed up in these few words. If we  abide  in
God by keeping ourselves always in a state  of  grace,  the  Last  Judgement
need have no terrors for us. For we shall then most certainly hear from  the
lips of our beloved Saviour the best of all invitations: “Come,  ye  blessed
of My Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from  the  foundation
of the world.” (Mat. 25:34).


Let us end this Chapter, therefore, with St. John's  injunction,  packed  as
it is with divine wisdom:


                                ABIDE IN HIM.


                                   SUMMARY

                        (A) DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD.
1. The Fact.
 (a). When. (b). How. (c). Features.
2. Signs.
 (a). Gospel preached to all.
 (b). Coming of Anti-Christ.
 (c). Return of Elias.
 (d). Conversion of the Jews.
                              (B) RESURRECTION.
1. What.
 (a). Substantial reunion of body and soul.
 (b). Supernatural.
 (c). Indissoluble.
2. Christ's Resurrection.
 (a). He raised the dead to life.
 (b). He foretold His own resurrection.
 (c). He rose from the dead.
 (d). Why we believe it.
3. General Resurrection.
 (a). Teaching of Christ.
 (b). Teaching of the Apostles.
 (c). Tradition.
4. Features of a Glorified Body.
 (a). Subtlety.
 (c). Agility.
 (b). Incorruptibility.
 (d). Clarity.

                             (C) LAST JUDGEMENT.
l. Its Nature and Purpose.
 (a). Man as a member of the race.
 (b). Vindication of Providence.
 (c). The last Sentence given by the Judge.
 (d). The value of fraternal charity.
 2. The Need To Be Ever Ready For It.
                               “ABIDE IN HIM.”
                                  EXERCISES
(A). Fill in the blanks and cross out wrong alternatives in  the  following:
–
1. On the Last Day the world (will) (will not) be annihilated. 2.  Scripture
says that it will be changed into “a (....) heavens and a (....) earth.”  3.
Four signs of the end of the world are: (....), (....),(....) and (....)  4.
The union between our body and soul is (a substantial) (an accidental)  one.
5. It is broken at the moment of (....). 6. Its restoration  is  called  the
(....). 7. At the resurrection, each will receive (a body) (his  own  body).
8. Christ raised three human beings from the  dead,  namely  (....),  (....)
and (....). 9. He also foretold His own (....); and actually raised  Himself
from the dead. 10. He said: “Destroy this (....), and in three days  I  will
raise it up.” 11. It  was  through  means  of  (....)  that  God  told  Mary
Madgalen that Christ had risen.  12.  A  glorified  body  has  four  amazing
powers, namely, (....), (....), (....) and (....). 13. St. Paul says of  the
body of the saved: “It is sown in (....) it shall  rise  in  (....).  It  is
sown in (....); it shall rise in (....). It is  sown  in  (....);  it  shall
rise in (....). It is sown a (....) body; it shall rise a (....) body.”  14.
“O death, where is thy (....)? O death, where is thy (....)”  15.  Scripture
says that the bodies of the lost shall be  “salted  with  (....).”  16.  The
Last Judgement is necessary for us as (individuals) (members of  the  race).
17. Christ will be Judge as (God) (Man). 18. He says that even  “every  idle
(....)” will be made known to all at the  Judgement.  The  sentence  at  the
Last Judgement will be (revocable) (irrevocable). 19. Children destined  for
Limbo (will) (will not) be present at the Last Judgement. 20.  To  be  ready
for the judgement, St. John tells us to “(....) in Him.”

(B) Answer each of the following as fully as you can:
1.   In what way will the world be destroyed at the end of time?
2.   What signs does Scripture give of this event? Why are they uncertain?
3.   Explain what the resurrection is. Why will each have his own body?
4.   Whom did Christ raise from the dead? Why  do  we  believe  in  His  own
   resurrection?
5.   Give the four qualities that are proper to a glorified  body.  Why  are
   they given?
6.   In what way will the bodies of the lost be  similar  to  those  of  the
   saved? In what way will they be different?
7.   Describe what will happen at the Last Judgement.
8. How can we be always ready for it?
